2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q139 School Name: P.S. 139 REGO PARK Principal: NATALIE PEREZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Rego Park School 342800010139 K-5 School Number (DBN): 28Q139 93-06 63 rd Drive, Rego Park, New York 11374 718-459-1044 718-997-8639 Phone Number: Fax: Mrs. NatalieL. Perez-Hernandez nperez42@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mrs. NatalieL. Perez-Hernandez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. TheresaSmith JenniferLing Ms. Kathleen Murphy N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd, Room 242, Jamaica, NY 11435 msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2622 Phone Number: 718-557-2740718-557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South- District 28 FSC: Ms. Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 8201 Rockaway Blvd., Queens, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mrs. Natalie L. Perez-Hernandez Ms. Theresa Smith Ms. Jennifer Ling n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Ms. Kathleen Murphy Mrs. CharissaContrino Ms. Jeannie DeCicco Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Ms.SashaBeltran-Cruz Mr. Adam Hinz Mr. Dai Ichikawa Ms. Erin Balsamo Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: P.S139Q is a school community where teachers, parents and students collaborate to provide a nurturing supportive and stimulating learning environment that is culturally responsive and provides opportunities for cultural exchanges. We will focus on rigorous standards-driven instruction by integrating the arts and 21st century technology to foster creativity, critical thinking, communication and collaboration in order for students to reach their full potential. 2018-19 CEP 9  Vision: We envision our students engaging as critical thinkers by gathering, manipulating, and evaluating data to explore complex real-world problems. Students will work collaboratively to communicate and create with varied technologies, analyzing and solving real-world problems while developing the versatility to respond to an ever-changing global society. In addition all students will be active participants in maintaining an environment that encourages respect for their surroundings and each other. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 139 is located in Rego Park, Queens. 53% of our students come from homes where languages other than English are spoken. The languages represented among these students are: Spanish-31%; Russian-24%; Chinese-4%, and the remaining 41% speak 29 different languages. The school serves a population of 1% Black or African American, 31% Hispanic, 40% White, and 24% Asian students. The attendance for the school year 2017-2018 was 94.6% . We embrace the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) Units of Study aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards that are focused on Balanced Literacy and are evidenced-based, for literacy instruction in grades K-2. A pivotal part of the literacy program is that students are matched to Just Right books to improve their reading proficiency through guided practice complemented with text complexity. Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop Project emphasizes the skills and strategies necessary for students to learn to be fluent readers that comprehend texts. Teachers College units of study focus on integrating strong science and social studies themes. During the 2017-18 school year we adopted the Expeditionary Learning (EL) literacy program in grades 3-5. This program encourages students to read grade-level appropriate texts that are aligned to science and social studies. Students have the opportunity to have meaningful conversations around the powerful messages and lessons in these books. Additionally, the texts allow students to delve further into critical thinking and supporting their thinking with evidence from their books. This yearlong journey has students becoming experts in areas such as important people, natural disasters, ecosystems, Native Americans, colonial times, animals and schools around the world. Mathematics is focused on using the Go Math curriculum. The school emphasizes open-ended problem solving daily through the implementation of the "SOLVE" protocol. We spotlight the Eight Mathematical Practices aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Students, teachers, and parents use the Go Math Think Central virtual platform for additional instructional materials and supports with skills and strategies. We are proud of P.S. 139’s emphasis on writing as a thinking curriculum. Students learn to grow the writer’s craft in narrative, opinion, and informational genres. Students are expected to write across the content areas such as mathematics, science and social studies. Writing improves communication and matters in a global economy. We are most proud of our Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) program as a behavior management system that rewards students and improves student culture and climate. Our PBIS program is further complimented by the implementation of the BrainPower and Sanford Harmony programs. In addition, our continuation grant with the Office of School Wellness serves as a beacon for the school community. This includes our funding for Cook Shop for Families and Cook Shop for Classrooms through the New York City Food Bank. We strive to promote a message of 2018-19 CEP 10  healthy eating for our students. The teachers along with students prepare weekly salads with healthy ingredients. We complement this healthy school wellness theme with Fitness Night and Move to Improve instruction in the classroom. Finally, we have embraced the Mighty Milers Program sponsored by New York City Road Runners. The arts play a key role at PS 139. We are proud of our amazing Glee Club and Visual Arts program. We supplement our in-school arts program through partnerships with Dancing Classrooms and Marquis Studios. The Parents’ Association has developed a strong after school Enrichment Program. Students are given a variety of choices such as: robotics, chess, yoga, guitar, and soccer. We also enjoy a strong partnership with the Forest Hills Central YWHA program which is anchored at P.S. 139. Students participate in arts and crafts, clubs, structured games, and homework help. The Parent Coordinator works closely with the Administration and the officers of the Parents’ Association Executive Board to increase parent engagement. Parents participate in Meet the Principal events, Information session and Working Lab Session on completing Lunch Forms, Dad's Take your Child to School Day, Close Reading Approach with Complex Texts, Family Fitness Night, Middle School Application Process, Nutrition workshops, myON Reader Workshop, Science Fair Workshop, Family Science Night, Inter-net Safety, Preparing your Child for the NYS ELA and Math exams, Getting to know the Standards Workshop, Arts & Crafts Workshops, the Emerging Writers’ Workshop and many more. We are proud of our on-going partnership with St. John’s University to work closely with aspiring teachers. P.S. 139 serves as a promising lab site for aspiring teachers as they grow their practice. We embrace the Common Core Learning Standards by offering learning activities online to promote cognitive challenge through myON Reader, Imagine Learning, MaxScholar and Achieve 3000. Our students participate in the Music Memory initiative, Ezra Jack Keats Bookmaking Competition and Linked Up with Carnegie Hall, to strengthen critical thinking skills and logic. We strive for robust opportunities to bring out the best in our students. According to the results of the 2018 New York State (NYS) English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics exams: In 2017, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 50%. In 2018, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 53%, which was an increase of 3%. In 2017, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 57%. In 2018, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 61%, which was an increase of 4%. 2018-19 CEP 11  Our Students with Disabilities (SWD) population: In 2017, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 21%. In 2018, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 34%, which was an increase of 13%. In 2017, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 43% In 2018, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 42%, which was a decrease of1%. According to the results of ELLs on the 2017-2018 NYS ELA and Math Exams: In 2017, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 9%. In 2018, ELA Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 10%, which was an increase of 1%. In 2017, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 23%. In 2018, Math Performance at levels 3 and 4 was 28%, which was an increase of 5%. Based on the 2017-2018 Measure of Leadership Practice (MoLP), an area of celebration for P.S. 139 is indicator (1.3) Resource Allocation. The school wide goals were supported by thoughtful and informed organizational decision as and allocation of resources. Based on the 2017-2018 Measure of Leadership Practice (MoLP), the area for improvement is indicator (1.2) Pedagogy. Special emphasis will be placed on professional learning to build teachers' capacity to plan higher-order questions and discussion protocols that engage all students in making claims and providing text-based evidence during daily lessons to ensure all students are consistently engaged in effective student to student discourse across all grades; which will lead to increased student achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have approximately 155 students identified as English Language Learners (ELLs). We implement the stand-alone English as a New Language (ENL) instructional model and the co-teaching/integrated partnerships based on the regulations of CR Part -154. The co-teaching partnerships emphasize content with language function. P.S. 139 collaborates with District 75 to provide an inclusion setting for 8 students from P.S. 177. These students enjoy the benefits of rigorous instruction while working and learning in mainstreamed classrooms. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 12  The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress during the 2017-18 school year were Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family-Community Ties. Rigorous Instruction: We exceeded the June 2018 goal of 70% of students increasing 1 level in trait 3 and trait 5 by 3%. 73% of students increased 1 level in trait 3 and trait 5 of the New York City Performance Task. This year, our focus will be on critical thinking. Strong Family -Community Ties: We exceeded the June 2018 goal of a 5% increase in communication between parents and teachers by 32%. Key Area of Focus: As per the feedback in the 2017-18 Measure of Leadership Practice (MoLP), this year we will focus on building teacher capacity to plan higher-order questions and discussion protocols that engage students in making claims and providing text-based evidence during daily lessons to ensure all students are consistently engaged in effective student to student discourse across all grades; which will lead to increased student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q139 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 750 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 48 32 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 14 32 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 54.4% % Reduced Lunch 17.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 31.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 38.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 104 75 2 94.6% 8.3% 17.7% 1.5% 25.7% 3.1% 2 4% 6 61.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the December 2017 Principal Practice Observation Report, rigorous work around critical thinking is needed in order to strategically promote academic growth and facilitate students' ownership of their learning. Although, it was noted that students showed improvement in their ability to participate in meaningful discourse, there was still a need for students to further push their thinking. We have determined that the school needs to begin planning how to effectively implement higher order question strategies and routines during all lessons that require students to think critically during discussion. During the 2017-2018 school year, the school's focus was rigorous work, critical thinking and building meaningful conversation. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to develop teacher capacity to create higher order questions and plan discussion protocols in order to provide opportunities for equitable participation during conversations; engaging all students in responding to and extending upon each others thinking with evidence. After analyzing the EoY_2018 MOSL ELA results, we noticed that 88% of Kindergarten students scored a level 3 or higher in trait 5(development), whereas only 59% of students in grades 1-5 scored a level 3 or higher in Trait 3 (providing the main idea and supporting details.) Based on the 2017/2018 New York State English Language Arts (ELA) Exam: student performance on informational reading standard 2 has decreased in grade 3 and increased slightly in grades 4 and 5. Grade 3 students received an average of 57% possible points on standards R.I.3.2 and R.L.3.2. In the previous year, they received an average of 63% on standards R.I.3.2 and R.L.3.2, which is a decrease of 6%. Grade 4 students received an average of 58% possible points on standards R.I.4.2 and R.L.4.2. In the previous year, they received an average of 56% on standards R.I.4.2 and R.L.4.2, which is a increase of 2%. Grade 5 students received an average of 68% possible points on standards R.I.5.2 and R.L.5.2. In the previous year, they received an average of 63% on standards R.I.5.2 and R.L.5.2, which is a increase of 5%. The Reading for Information standard 2 and the Reading Literature standard 2 calls for students to find the main idea of a text and write a summary including details from the text. This data shows the need to continue to target making claims and supporting the claims with text based evidence. To support our English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and high performing students; teachers will provide students with language notes to aid with forming sentences to support a claim, multiple entry points, small group instruction and extension activities. 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers will incorporate higher order questioning in their plans to ensure that students think critically and thoughtfully while participating in discourse across all subject areas. Students need to be able to solve problems efficiently, and explain their reasoning, supporting it with concrete evidence. Additionally, scaffolds will be in place for SWDs, ELLs, and struggling students. Reading for information and answering text-based questions is essential for improving student achievement. Students will also focus on character interactions to help synthesize main ideas and themes. This will lead to further understanding and discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will receive professional learning to improve their planning of higher order questions and discussion protocols in order to provide opportunities for equitable participation during conversations; engaging all students in responding to and extending upon each others thinking with evidence resulting in 65% of all students scoring level three or higher as measured by Trait 1 (main idea and key details) of the New York City ELA Performance Task in grades 1, 3, 4 and 5. 65% of all Grade 2 students will score a level 3 in Trait 3 (citing text based evidence to support the main topic) of the New York City ELA Performance Task. 65% of all Kindergarten students will score a level 3 or higher in Trait 5 (citing text based evidence to support the main topic) of the New York City ELA Performance Task. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The administrative team will support teacher progress in competency 3b, using questioning and discussion techniques in order to push students critical thinking. In addition, administrators will highlight structures set in place to foster student to student discourse. Evidence will be noted from observations and learning walks and will be discussed with teachers during teacher feedback meetings. The administrative team will provide teachers and service providers with ongoing professional development that addresses what effective questioning and discourse is and making sure it is taking place in their classrooms. Teacher teams will participate in professional learning cycles to align, modify and revise curriculum so that critical thinking and discussion activities are consistently and strategically embedded in all areas of instruction. Teachers will create tasks that embed higher order questioning and discourse that are aligned to units of study. Teachers will differentiate instructional strategies so that all students have access to rigorous learning activities. Students with disabilities, English language learners and other high needs subgroups will be supported with differentiated tools, including charts, picture support, scaffolded practice, and question/discussion stems and language notes. Students will also practice through sustained established partnership protocol and group talk. Teachers will use success criteria in order to promote student agency and independence. Evidence that these activities are implemented will be assessed during inter visitations, discussions, observations and learning walks. Teachers will increase their effectiveness in conducting close reading to support critical thinking. All students will be able to participate in meaningful discourse around common grade-level texts, pose questions, and effectively respond to the ideas of Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 teacher teams, all clusters all students with a heavy emphasis on ENLs, SWDs and high achievers K-5 teacher teams, all clusters all students with a heavy emphasis on students ENLs, SWDs, and high achievers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, English as a New Language (ENL) Teachers, SETTS/ IEP Teacher, Collaborative Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 Administration, lead teachers, Collaborative Teacher Teams, English as a New Language (ENL) Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers K-5 teachers and all clusters September 2018-June 2019 Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 17  others. Teachers will use the Revised Bloom's Taxonomy to come up with higher order thinking questions for all lessons. In addition to using Revised Bloom's Taxonomy, teachers will be looking at the released NYS ELA exam to ensure that the questions the teachers plan mirror those posed on the ELA. Evidence that effective conversation is taking place will be assessed during observations and learning walks. Teachers in grades 3-5 will be revising their unit plans for Expeditionary Learning. Teachers will be meeting in their teacher teams to adjust instruction based on students' needs. On a daily basis students will engage with rigorous texts thinking critically to answer text dependent questions and supporting their ideas with evidence from the text in both literature and informational texts. Teachers will work on vocabulary activities through the texts the students are reading. Collaborative vertical teams will monitor student progress by analyzing student work products, such as conversational transcripts, checklists, writing pieces and peer feedback. Teams will note performance trends in order to adjust whole-class instruction and plan for targeted small group instruction to support students in need of additional support, which includes ELLs, students with disabilities, and advanced learners. They will be concentrating on the priority standards R.I.2- Determining the main idea of a text and supporting it with details; R.I.3- Analyze how and why individuals/events, or ideas develop and interact over the course of a text, R.I.4 & R.L.4- Using context clues to determine the meaning of new words. Teachers will discuss their student's progress during data dives and weekly grade meetings. Additionally, they will discuss how the changes have impacted their grade during Vertical team meetings. All cluster teachers will be assigned a skill and standard to work on. For example, during art, students can complete an artist study where they make connections between details in the art work with details in a text. In gym class, students can study the history of a sport, or research players at professional levels. Teacher's will use the Revised Bloom's Taxonomy to create questions in all content areas. Questioning techniques will be evident during learning walks and observations. 3-5 teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration and teachers in grades 3-5 September 2018-June 2019 K-5 teacher teams, all clusters all students with a heavy emphasis on ENLs, SWDs, and high achievers Administration, lead teachers, Collaborative Teacher Teams, English as a New Language (ENL) Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers All cluster teachers and all students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Cluster teachers, and Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 18 All students in grades 2-5. September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers/ ENL teachers All students in grades 2-5 are participating in weekly close reading passages that are obtained from Achieve 3000. Achieve 3000 provides scaffolds for ENL students. These texts provide rich vocabulary that is pre-taught by both the classroom teacher as well as ENL teacher. The ENL students have the opportunity to log on to Achieve 3000 to read and answer questions associated with texts that are pre-chosen by the teacher and are tailored to their grade level lexile band or current independent reading level. Teachers will discuss their student's progress during data dives and weekly grade meetings. Additionally, they will discuss how the changes have impacted their grade during Vertical team meetings. The ELA vertical team, which consists of at least one teacher from grades K-5 will focus on reading standard 2, which is to determine main idea of a text and support it with details, during cycle 1. The change strategy will be decided upon after conducting an analysis of student work. All students in grades K-5 October 2018- January 2019 Classroom teachers, Teacher teams, Cluster teachers Observations, data and best practices will be discussed. The ELA vertical team, which consists of at least one teacher from grades K-5, will focus on reading standard 3, (analyzing how and why individuals, events or ideas develop or interact over the course of a text), during cycle 2. The team will choose a change strategy to implement during the second cycle of their inquiry work. Observations, data and best practices will be discussed. The ELA vertical team, which consists of at least one teacher from grades K-5, will focus on reading standard 4, (using context clues to determine the meaning of new words), during cycle 3. The team will choose a change strategy to implement during the third cycle of their inquiry work. Observations, data and best practices will be discussed. ENL teachers will provide ongoing professional learning for classroom teachers and cluster teachers on different ENL strategies to impact language acquisition across all four modalities for our ELLs. ENL teachers will review previous strategies taught such as language objectives, language notes , and "think, pair, share" protocol. ENL teachers are also reviewing professional learning on "TAPPLE" ( T- teach first, A- Ask a All students in grades K-5 February 2019- April 2019 Classroom teachers, Teacher teams, Cluster teachers All students in grades K-5 April 2019-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Teacher teams, Cluster teachers All students in grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Cluster Teachers, ENL Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  question, P- Pause and allow process time, P- Pick a participant, L-Lean in, listen actively and lower voice, E- Echo, elaborate and explain) and SCAMPER (S-Scribble Ideas C-Make Connections A-Add on M- Make adjustments P-Pick an alternate word E-Extend your thinking R-Revise/reverse your thinking). All these strategies and scaffolds provide students with entry points into conversation. ENL teachers will continue to provide professional learning on Think-Jot-Pair-Share. Think-Pair-Share, "TAPPLE" and "SCAMPER" strategies will be visible throughout the classrooms in the school. Students with disabilities will have access to Max Scholar. Max Scholar is a multi-sensory approach to the 5 pillars of reading. It focuses on phonics and fluency. It targets many learning styles: visual, auditory and tactile modalities. Students answer comprehension questions based on texts. Student progress is tracked and progress reports are generated in each of the areas of literacy. K-5 SWD and SETSS September 2018- June 2019 IEP/SETSS Teacher ENL students will also have access to Imagine Learning. Imagine Learning is a research based, standards aligned curriculum that builds core reading and academic skills and language. The focus is on vocabulary, reading, listening, grammar, phonics and fluency. The tasks are differentiated and progress with the needs of the student. ELLS ENL Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will work with students to implement discourse protocols through grand conversation. The students will work on conversational techniques such as eye contact, equal participation, adding on, active listening and questioning. All students in grades K-5. September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Cluster teachers, ENL teachers Evidence that effective conversation is taking place will be evident during observations and learning walks. The Administrative team will provide teachers with professional learning sessions on Think Pair Share protocol to use in all content areas in order to support teacher progress in competency 3b, using questioning and discussion techniques in order to push critical thinking and discussion. All students in grades K-5. October 2018-December 2018 The Administrative team will provide teachers with professional learning sessions on incorporating higher order thinking questions to promote critical thinking and discussion using Revised Bloom's Taxonomy. All students in grades K-5. ENL teachers are providing professional learning on the "Say, Mean, Matter" protocol which is helping students formulate their ideas for writing. All Students in Grades K-5. October 2018-December 2018 February 2019-June 2019 Administration, English as New Language Teachers (ENL), SETTS/IEP Teacher, Collaborative Teacher Teams ENL Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Classroom teachers ENL Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 The Administrative team will provide teachers with professional learning sessions on the Think Jot Pair Share Protocol in all content areas, in order to support teacher progress in competency 3b, using questioning and discussion techniques in order to push critical thinking and discussion. All students in Grades K-5 January 2019-June 2019 Administration, English as New Language Teachers (ENL), SETTS/IEP Teacher, Collaborative Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be provided to engage families in hands-on activities and strategies that can help them develop their child's ability to engage in high level discussion at home. These workshops will teach families about the discussion work that is taking place in the classroom as well as the questioning techniques the teachers are using to promote student thinking. It will provide them with strategies to increase the level of discourse in which their students are engaging outside of school. A variety of workshops in all disciplines are offered (Amplify, Living A Writer's Life, Getting to Know Go Math and Diving Into Math Problems, Close Reading, NYS ELA & Math Workshop) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administration, teachers (classroom, ENL, SETSS), Guidance Counselor, Speech 2. Monday Professional Development and Tuesday Parent Engagement 3. Common preps and teacher team meetings 4. Per Session 5. Per Diem 6. Off site professional development 7. Schedule adjustments will be based on a seven period day to advance teacher collaborations and extend the instructional period to 50 minutes. Schedules will be adjusted based on a needs basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 21  By February 2019, 33% of all students in Grades 1, 3, 4, and 5 will score a level three or higher as measured by Trait 1 (main idea and key details) students in Grade 2 will score a level 3 or higher as measured by Trait 3 (citing text based evidence to support the main topic) or Trait 5 for Kindergarten (citing text based evidence to support the main topic) of the New York City ELA Performance Tasks. Mid-year Progress Monitoring Update: (February 2019) As of February 2019, we did not meet our mid-year goal. Based on February 2019 NYC ELA Performance Task (MoSL) data:  As of February 2019, 31% of students in grades 1, 3, 4 and 5 scored a level 3 or higher in trait 1. 14% of students in grade 2 scored a level 3 or higher in trait 3. 23% of Kindergarten students scored a level 3 or higher in trait 5.  Although we did not meet our mid-year target, our students did make significant gains in the trait noted for their grade. 85% of all students increased 1 benchmark level or more on the NYC ELA Performance Task. In addition, 33% of all students moved up points on the NYC ELA Performance Task.  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure will be the New York City ELA Performance Tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At PS 139, our goal is to create a supportive environment where all students feel safe and can reach their full potential. Students are rewarded for displaying desired, expected, and positive behaviors. We realize that a positive, inclusive, and culturally responsive climate allows students to grow both socially and academically and we have employed various initiatives to facilitate our goal. According to data gathered during the 2017-2018 school year from the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), there were 7 incidents related to insensitivity, discrimination or cultural bias among students. A trend was noticed that there was an increase in these incidents during the 2017-2018 school year. These infractions are categorized under A37 in the Student Intervention Discipline Code (April 2017). It has been noted that our students need to demonstrate more sensitivity and acceptance as related to differences in their peers' actual or perceived appearance, race, ethnicity, culture, religion, disability or national origin . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 75% reduction of A37 infractions as indicated by OORS reports. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Through a culture of PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) students will continue to be taught the expected behaviors and rewarded when this behavior is demonstrated in all locations. Students will receive "Star Bucks" when demonstrating appropriate behavior. They can save their "money" to purchase small items available at a school store on a weekly basis. Parents are invited to monthly Student of the Month assemblies where our star citizens are recognized for their exemplary behavior. School wide implementation of Brain Power will increase students' peer relationships, self esteem, self-regulation, stress management and levels of positive behavior. Parent workshops will be held to introduce the benefits of brain management for self mastery. Through the implementation of the Sanford Harmony Program through LIU, students will build relationships with each other within each individual classroom. Students will buddy up with a different classmate each week to strengthen bonds within the classroom, helping build a tolerance for differences. To reinforce our Respect for All initiative, all students participate in a poster contest to express what respect means to them, and posters will be displayed throughout the lobby. Grade K-5 School-wide read alouds (Principal's Book of the Month) are carefully selected to address different character education traits and or celebrate diversity on a monthly basis. Each student is allowed to take the book home to read with their family to strengthen the home school connection and reinforce character development. Grade K-5 Families Sept. 2018- June 2019 Lessons will be differentiated to help support the needs of English language learners and students with disabilities. Translation will be available as necessary. Students who need additional support will be worked with in small group or Grade K- 5 Students and Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, School Counselor, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 24 Grade K-Grade 5 Sept.2018 - June 2019 and Parents Administration, School Counselor, PBIS Committee, All Teachers and Support Staff Grade K- Grade 5 and Parents Sept.2018 - Administration, Classroom Teachers June 2019 Grade K - Grade 5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, School Counselor, Teachers and Support Staff Administration, School Counselor, Teachers Administration School Counselor and Teachers  individually. Outside referrals will be made to community based organizations as necessary. Through workshops, parent conferences, newsletters, email, phone calls we will deepen parents' understanding of a supportive environment while strengthening and reinforcing the home school connection. These workshops will include Positive Parenting, Health and Emotional Wellness. In order to provide additional supports for high risk students who exhibit ongoing behavioral and emotional challenges, functional behavioral assessments and behavior intervention plans will be established to identify and minimize triggers. We will continue to collaborate with our School Counseling Manager/Field Support Office and team to provide us with additional measures and means of supports to de-escalate and minimize these occurrences with high risk students. Outside referrals will be made to Community Based Organizations for counseling supports, evaluations, medical supports as necessary for families of students exhibiting behavioral challenges at school and home. Restorative practices training and tiering the resources into the existing instructional systems. Cultural Bias and Sensitivity Training to educate our community as to the importance of embracing diversity and celebrating differences. Grade K-5 Students and Families Sept. 2018- June 2019 Grade K-5 Students and Families Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Grade K and Grade 3 Students during the first year of implementation Grade K-5 Students and Families, Teachers Opportunities for conversations with parents and staff about changes to the discipline code, progressive discipline and bullying vs. conflict. Grade K -5 Students and Families, Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Culturally Responsive Instruction to be incorporated into the curriculum through carefully selected read alouds and lessons aimed at developing empathy and providing opportunities for cross cultural exchange. Building trust with the students and community through school events, assemblies and workshops geared toward creating sensitivity, inclusion and empowerment. Grade K - 5 Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Grade K -5 Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration, School Counselor, School Psychologist, School Social Worker, School Counseling Manager/Field Support Office Administration, School Counselor, School Psychologist, School Social Worker, Parent Coordinator Administration, Classroom Teachers, School Counselor, School Psychologist, School Social Worker Administration, Classroom Teachers, School Counselor, Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor Administration, Classroom Teachers, School Counselor Administration, Classroom Teachers, School Counselor, Parent Coordinator A "Respect for All" week during the Department of Education's designated week has been implemented at PS 139. Students and staff were encouraged to participate in various school spirit days celebrating anti-bullying, empathy, team building, and tolerance for diversity. Teachers were also given school Grade K-5 Students and Staff February 11- 15, 2019 School Counselor , Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 25  wide lessons and activities (The Crayon Box that Talked poem and project) to do with their class during this week to support our shared goal of demonstrating tolerance and diversity in our community. Professional Development to be provided during our Instructional Cabinet meeting to address properly classifying incidents in OORS using the correct infraction code in the discipline code. Administrative Cabinet Members, Administration February 2019-June 2019 Administration, School Counselor On April 9, 2019 School Counselor, Ms. Bono and Parent Coordinator, Ms. Lipton will attend a Respect for All training. Information will be shared with Administrative Cabinet, staff, students and families. All staff members were trained in Respect for All and received certification through an online interactive training course centered around building respectful conversational skills. Grades K-5 Students, April 2019 - June 2019 Administration, School Counselor, Parent Coordinator Administration, Staff, families All Staff, March 2019 Administration Administration In response to our community's needs, we have adjusted the Annual Parent Workshop Calendar and are partnering with the NYC Commission on Human Rights to educate families on how to identify and report discrimination and respond to bias related incidents. Grade K-5 Students, Families and Classroom Teachers Grade 5 students will take part in an outdoor school beautification project to reinforce to students that their actions matter and that as a community we work together to right the wrong. Themes will focus on Tolerance and Unity in our community. Grade K -5 Students, Families and Classroom Teachers. A school-wide read aloud entitled, "A Tree In The Courtyard; Looking Through Anne Frank's Window", has been selected to educate students about her experience. The Brooklyn Jewish Museum has been invited in to host an assembly and speak with students about anti-semitism. Grade K- 5 Students, Classroom Teachers and Administration Grade 3 - 5 Students, classroom teachers and Administration March 2019- June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers and Support Personnel March 2019- June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers April 2019 Administration, Classroom Teachers April 2019 Administration, Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through workshops, parent conferences, newsletters, email, phone calls we will deepen parents' understanding of a supportive environment while strengthening the home school connection. These workshops will include Positive Parenting, Health and Emotional Wellness, undiagnosed emotional issues, ADHD, or other behavioral and neurological disorders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - PBIS Committee, Students, Teachers, Parents and Staff Members, School Climate Committee, Student Council Instructional Resources - PBIS Lesson Plans, Sanford Harmony Kits, Power Brain training materials Schedule adjustments to be made to allow for activities as needed, based on a seven period day. School Store will be open for one period per week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a 50% decrease in A37 infractions will be noted as measured by data from OORS reports. Mid-year Progress Monitoring Update: (February 2019) As of February 2019, we did not meet our mid-year goal. Based on February 2019, OORS Reports:  Data gathered from OORS indicated that there were 7 incidents identified as a "A37"  Upon closer inspection of these incidents, it was noted that 5 of the 7 incidents should have been classified as an "A23" instead. It was not possible to change the infraction code at this time, skewing the data.   Two of the incidents were, in fact, correctly classified as an A37.  Our projected goal of a 50% reduction of A37 incidents has been exceeded. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the feedback on the March 2018 Principal Practice Observation Report (PPO), it was noted that weekly reviews of unit plans by various stake holders, as well as, feedback would be effective in executing the implementation of daily lesson plans by all teachers and service providers. The staff will continue to work on developing lessons and academic tasks that are rigorous and include opportunities for critical thinking that address and meet the specific learning needs of all learners, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher teams will include opportunities for discourse and rigorous academic tasks to meet the needs of all levels of learners resulting in 65% of students improving 1 benchmark level or more in trait 1 for grades 2 through 5, (write and interpret numerical expressions) as measured by the 2019 New York City Mathematics Performance Task, (Grade 2, 2.OA.A.1 represent and solve problems involving addition and subtraction, Grade 3 3.OA.A.1 represent and solve problems involving multiplication and division, Grade 4 4.OA.A.3 Use the four operations with whole numbers to solve problems, and Grade 5, 5.NBT.B.7, apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication and division to multiply and divide fractions). 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher Teams will work collaboratively to include vocabulary preview, tiered questioning, conversational prompts, and enrichment activities to provide multiple entry points for all students using the Go Math instructional program as well as Engage NY to enhance critical thinking skills. Teacher Teams will continue to create a uniform feedback folder for all students that will individualized goals and next steps in all content areas. Math goals will be created during conferences based on students' present level of performance and next steps so students are challenged and engaged in productive struggle. Goals will be monitored and adjusted by teachers and students. Goals will be shared with parents on an on-going basis. Teacher teams will work collaboratively to create uniform unit plans that include specific pre/post assessments, content vocabulary, learning targets and tasks aligned to the common core standards and include elements of higher order questioning. Teacher teams will continue to ensure unit plans include differentiation to meet the needs of ELLs, SWD's, as well as enrichment activities for children performing at or above grade level. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 K-5 teacher teams, all cluster teachers ENLs, and SWDs K-5 students teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs and parents K-5 students teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers, all Service Providers and parents. Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Teacher teams will work collaboratively with service providers and all clusters to create open ended, tiered problem solving tasks to be administered school wide K-5. As well as build math talk and reasoning to enhance critical thinking through discourse and number sense across all mathematical concepts. September 2018-June 2019 K-5 teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers 2018-19 CEP 29  Teacher Teams will embed various formative assessments throughout lessons as well as unit plans to effectively check for students' understanding. Teacher teams will implement the SOLVE protocol in problem solving extensions to daily Go Math lessons to reinforce problem solving skills across the Go Math Units. The implementation of the SOLVE strategy will be supported by a consultant from the National Training Network (NTN) that will provide professional learning with the math vertical team. K-5 students, teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs K-5 students, teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs K-5 students, teacher teams, all cluster teachers ELLs, and SWDs Math Vertical Team and grade level Teacher Teams will work collaboratively with service providers and all cluster teachers to revise and supplement plans for Go Math lessons to incorporate daily opportunities for solving rigorous multi-step word problems using Achievethecore.org and Engageny.org tasks and activities. The teams will also revise and adjust Go Math curriculum mapping in order to replace non essential lessons with more effective lessons from achievethecore.org Math Vertical Team, Teacher Teams, IEP Teacher September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 November 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Teacher teams will review math unit plans and supplement the deficiencies of the Go Math program with more rigorous tasks from Engageny.org. Teacher teams in grades 3-5 will transition students to using an adaptive visual for the SOLVE protocol enabling them to apply the protocol in an expedited manner. This will enable students to apply the protocol to more problems. This work will be supported by a consultant from the National Training Network (NTN) that will provide professional learning with the math vertical team. K-5 students, teacher teams, ELLs, and SWDs September 2018- June 2019 March 2019- June 2019 3-5 Students, teacher teams, ELLS and SWDs One class on each grade 3-5 will be piloting a new math program better aligned to the standards and built around students applying their conceptual understanding to using the SOLVE protocol to answer rigorous multi-step word problems. 3-5 Students, teacher teams, ELLS and SWDs March 2019-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principal, Collaborative Teacher Teams, ENL Teachers , Special Education Teachers and all Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, Teacher Teams Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, Teacher Teams Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be provided to engage parents in hands on activities and strategies that can help them develop their child's ability to engage in high level discussion at home. Parents will learn how to monitor the Think Central website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Collaborative Teacher Teams, Administration, Parents, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Leaders, Core Inquiry Teacher Leaders Instructional Resources: Teachers College Units of Study reading units (K-2) Expeditionary Learning (3-5), professional literature, school generated collaborative inquiry documents, Advance System evidence-based data regarding teaching practices, teacher reflection documents to support Learning Walks, and Community Reads. Schedule adjustments will be made on an on-going basis upon a seven period instructional day and a 50 minute instructional period. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 19% of students will improve one benchmark level or more as measured by the NYC Mathematics Performance Tasks. Mid-year Progress Monitoring Update: (February 2019) As of February 2019, we met our mid-year goal. Based on February 2019, NYC Mathematics Performance Task (MOSL):  As of February 2019, 32.5% of the students have improved one benchmark level or more as measured by the NYC Mathematics Performance Task (Grade 2 has shown an increase of 47% in 2.OA.1, Grade 3 has shown an increase of 52% in 3.OA.A3, Grade 4 has shown an increase of 10% in 4.OA.A3, , Grade 5 has shown an increase of 21% in 5.NBT.B.7) It should be noted that fourth grade did not meet the goal due to the fact that on the NYC Mathematics Performance Task the trait 4.0A.A3 is combined with 4.NF.B.4, which the teachers are in the process of teaching at this point in the year.  2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Mathematics Performance Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Measure of Leadership Practice (MoLP), Indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy) was rated proficient and additional next steps were provided to further growth in this indicator. As stated in the feedback, "The use of scaffolds were particularly well executed especially with the ENL and SWD populations. As a next step, please consider further ways to promote critical thinking and generate deeper student discussions..." According to the 2018 June Instructional Report data: Student performance in 2018 on Informational Reading Standard 2 has decreased in grade 3 and minimal growth was achieved in grades 4 and 5. In 2018, Grade 3 students received an average of 57% on standards R.I.3.2 and R.L.3.2. In 2017, they received an average of 63% on standards R.I.3.2 and R.L.3.2, which was a decrease of 6%. In 2018, Grade 4 students received an average of 58% possible points on standards R.I.4.2 and R.L.4.2. In 2017, they received an average of 56% on standards R.I.4.2 and R.L.4.2, which is an increase of 2%. In 2018, Grade 5 students received an average of 68% on standards R.I.5.2 and R.L.5.2. In 2017, they received an average of 63% on standards R.I.5.2 and R.L.5.2, which was an increase of 5%. Reading for Information Standard 2 and Reading Literature Standard 2 call for students to determine the main idea of a text and provide text-based evidence. This data shows the need to continue to focus on making claims and supporting the claims with text based evidence. Based on the the 2017-18 MoLP, 2018 NYS ELA Assessment and Observation feedback, we need to build teachers' capacity to plan higher-order questions and discussion protocols that engage students in making claims and providing text-based evidence during daily lessons to ensure all students are consistently engaged in effective student to student discourse across all grades; which will lead to increased student achievement. During the 2018-19 School Year, school leaders will create cycles of Professional Learning to build teacher capacity to plan higher-order questions and discussion protocols across content areas. Cycles of Professional Learning will be adjusted and refined based on teacher team data analysis, observation cycles and Instructional Cabinet learning walks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide opportunities for professional learning specifically targeting competencies 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction and 3b. Questioning and Discussion Technique, resulting in 50% of teachers increasing one benchmark level or more in competencies 1e. and 3b. as measured by the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 33  2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Professional Development Committee will draft a year long professional learning plan to build teachers' capacity to plan higher-order questions (Revised Bloom's Taxonomy levels analyze, evaluate and/or create) and discussion protocols that require students to engage in discourse where they are making claims that are supported by text-based evidence. Teacher teams will analyze student work for evidence of tasks that embed higher-order questions (Revised Bloom's Taxonomy levels analyze, evaluate and/or create) and discussion protocols that require students to engage in discourse where they are making claims that are supported by text-based evidence. Administrators will work with teacher teams to continue to monitor and support the implementation of scaffolds and differentiation to support the learning needs of students with disabilities and English Language Learners when answering higher-order questions and engaging in discourse with peers across all disciplines. The Principal and Assistant Principal, informed by the Danielson Framework, will continually observe teachers and give cycles of feedback that impact student achievement and teacher professional growth in competencies 1e and 3b; highlighting evidence of higher-order questions and discussion protocols that provide opportunities for equitable participation during conversations; engaging all students in responding to and extending upon each other’s thinking with text-based evidence across content areas. Support plans, that include professional learning opportunities, and next steps will be used with fidelity to maximize the professional growth of each teacher in competencies 3b and 1e. The Professional Development Committee and Instructional Cabinet will meet at minimum four times during the year to analyze overall Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) data in the Advance system to plan, monitor and revise cycles of professional learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Professional Development Committee Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher Team Members Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher Team Members Principal, Assistant Principal,Core Inquiry Members, and Professional Development Committee K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Cabinet, and Professional 2018-19 CEP 35  Administration will lead the Instructional Cabinet in data analysis of assessments such as NYC Performance Tasks, Running Records, End of Unit Assessments, etc. to identify performance trends that are grade-specific and school-wide. Adjustments will be made to action plans and professional learning cycles in response to the data trends. K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and the Instructional Cabinet will ensure the units of study, which are well-written, are aligned with the observable practices seen during classroom instruction by engaging in weekly "Learning Walks" to monitor the transference from quality units to high quality instruction. During professional learning and teacher team meetings, low inference gaps observed during "Learning Walks" will be shared with teachers to strengthen the transference from quality units, to high quality instruction. K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Pedagogues will provide professional learning to model effective questioning and discussion practices during inter-visitations and professional learning sessions. K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams will continue to incorporate daily opportunities for solving rigorous multi-step word problems using Achievethecore.org and Engageny.org tasks and embed discussion protocols to engage all students in student to student discourse during mathematics. Cycles of professional learning will continue to be provided to support teachers with planning appropriate language scaffolds and protocols like language notes, Think-Pair-Share, Think-Pod-Square, TAPPLE, and SCAMPER to provide access to students with disabilities and English Language Learners when answering higher-order questions and engaging in discourse with peers. The Annual Professional Development Calendar will be adjusted to provide additional cycles of professional learning to support teachers with planning higher-order questions using the "Scaffolded Questioning" strategy to promote student thinking and understanding. K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 The Annual Professional Development Calendar will be adjusted to provide additional cycles of professional learning to support teachers with planning higher-order questions within the content area of mathematics. K-5 Teachers, January 2019 Cluster Specialists and related service providers The Annual Professional Development Calendar will be adjusted to provide additional cycles of professional learning to support K-5 Teachers, March 2019-May 2019 Development Committee Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leads, Instructional Cabinet members, and Professional Development Committee Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leads, Instructional Cabinet members, and Professional Development Committee Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers and Instructional Cabinet members Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leads and Teacher Team Members Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Development Committee and Lead Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Development Committee and Lead Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Development Committee and Instructional Cabinet Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional 2018-19 CEP 36 teachers with planning higher-order questions using the essential question of the unit. Cluster Specialists and related service providers The Annual Professional Development Calendar will be adjusted to provide additional cycles of professional learning to support teachers with embedding a "square" component to the "Think-Jot-Pair-Share" protocol to transition to the "Think-Jot-Pair-Square-Share" school-wide protocol. Teachers will integrate opportunities for students to engage in the consensus making process in preparation for a grand conversation. K-5 Teachers, March 2019-June 2019 Cluster Specialists and related service providers Development Committee and Instructional Cabinet Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Development Committee and Instructional Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators will empower parents and families to support students' achievement by providing opportunities for parents to experience effective questioning techniques and discussion protocols through workshops and classroom visitations to share strategies and engage families as partners in educating their child(ren). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources; Administration, parents, teachers, UFT Chapter Chairperson, Teacher Leaders, and Parent Coordinator. Application Systems Utilized: School Net, TC Assessment Pro, and the Advance System Schedule Adjustments will be made on an on-going basis based upon a seven period instructional day and a 50 minute instructional period. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of teachers will increase one benchmark level or more in competencies 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction 3b. Questioning and Discussion Technique as measured by the Danielson Framework. Mid-year Progress Monitoring Update: (February 2019) As of February 2019, we did not meet our mid-year goal. 2018-19 CEP 37  Based on February 2019 Measures of Teacher Practice Ratings in Advance; which are measured by the Danielson Framework: *15% of teachers increased one benchmark level or more in competencies 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction. This is 19% less than our target goal of 30%. *11% of teachers increased one benchmark level or more in competencies 3b. Questioning and Discussion Technique. This is 21% less than our target goal of 30%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Danielson Framework. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 139 our goal is to create an inclusive environment where parents feel empowered; work in partnership and collaboration with school staff with the common goal of student achievement. Statistics show that parental involvement is one of the key factors in students success. We realize that when parents are our partners and communication flows both ways, we are able to build trust, maximize participation and involvement at workshops, school events and Parent-Teacher Conferences. According to data gathered from 2017-2018 attendance sign-in sheets and the PCAR (Parent Coordinator Activity Report), parents are interested in a variety of workshop topics and events that are offered. By offering a variety of topics, translations and times for our workshops throughout the 2018-2019 school year, we will be able to increase participation by appealing to the interests, language needs and time constraints of a wider and more diverse population. As a result, we will build trust, have greater participation and collaboration which will foster and strengthen our Family-Community Ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase participation in school events such as Parent Workshops and Parent-Teacher Conferences by 5% in comparison to the 2017-2018 school year as measured by documented attendance. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During Parent Engagement additional workshops will be offered monthly to assist parents in helping them to understand and prepare their children for success at the next level. Translation services will be available as necessary. Parents will be offered opportunities to speak and meet with the teachers to review their child's progress. This will support the efforts by teachers to share with families the curriculum and exciting learning activities. This will build and strengthen content language and communication between parents and teachers through transparency. Additionally, Parent Workshops will be offered at different times throughout the day, night and weekends in all disciplines so all of our students will be on track for College and Career Readiness. We will tailor workshops for students on all academic levels including our English Language Learners; Students with Disabilities; higher achieving; and those approaching grade standards in order to increase academic rigor across all grade levels. Incentives to increase attendance will include, raffles and refreshments. During the September and May Open School Nights, and Parent Orientation sessions for incoming English Language Learners ; activities and curriculum content will be presented to our families to enable them to support their children throughout the school year. Resources and strategies will be made available to support and strengthen student achievement and to foster the home school partnership. We will keep parents informed of school wide and citywide events by weekly emails, teacher newsletters, teacher websites, Tea Time with the Principal, the Parents Association monthly newsletters and social media outlets such as Facebook, Twitter, Remind.com and the school website. Translation services will be offered and utilized as necessary to enable all parents to help the students succeed. Through our Broadband Connect phone system parents receive phone calls in their preferred language. The school will take advantage of the opportunities offered by our partnership with the NY Hall of Science through the Cultural Afterschool Program (CASA) offered to our students and their families to grow domain specific vocabulary linked to exploration of science topics through investigations. Families will take Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades K - Sept. 2018 5 and Parents - June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers Grades K - Sept. 2018 - 5 and Parents June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers Grades K- Sept. 2018 - 5 and Parents June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers All students, Families and Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers and NY Hall of Science 2018-19 CEP 40 All students, Families and Teachers Sept. 2018 - Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers and Support Personnel June 2019 advantage of the two Family Days offered at the NY Hall of Science. This will give all of our students, inclusive of students with disabilities, ELL's and other high needs students and their families a chance to reinforce what the cultural institutions offer resulting in increased student achievement and performance as evidenced through student discourse. In addition we will continue to promote IDNYC so our families have more opportunities to engage in cultural exploration and have additional resources available to build and apply knowledge across all disciplines. Our families of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) will be engaged throughout the school year prior to their annual IEP reviews and provided access to online resources, workshops, practical tools and strategies conducive to students academic growth and achievement. Our families of high need groups will be offered our in house resources and supports as well as other community resources provided through our partnership with Thrivenyc. Workshops focused on developing cultural sensitivity, inclusion, emotional and social wellness will be offered to educate all stakeholders. To address the needs of our ELL population we have signage that reflects the different languages that make up our school community which enables translation services to be provided in the parents home language. Through parent surveys, documentation will be translated and distributed in the parents preferred language as well as providing translation services throughout the building for meetings, phone conversations and Parent Teacher conferences. Our parents will have an opportunity to converse and have translation available through our Translation stations (iPad kiosks) in our Main Office. Through our Title III program, parents will be invited to attend English Language Learning workshops that will help them to become an integral part of the PS 139 learning community resulting in greater academic achievement by their children. Bilingual books will be available to parents to provide additional support at home for students academic growth. To strengthen our partnership amongst these stakeholders we will all meet and collaborate to address the needs of these students by communicating in person, over the phone, email, workshops, conferences and all other possible methods. 2018-19 CEP 41 To increase parental engagement we will continue to provide parents with a plethora of opportunities to participate in school events and strengthen our partnership through our Student of the Month Assemblies, cultural assemblies, Career Day, artistic endeavors, class trips and additional activities that arise. To engage parents as parents we created a mid-year Parent Survey to assess the parent workshops being offered. Based on the survey parents indicated they wanted additional workshops to support their understanding of the school wide Instructional Focus around higher order questioning and high quality discourse. Based on the Parent Survey we adjusted our annual Parent Workshop offerings and embedded cycles of Professional Learning around Higher Order Questioning and the schoolwide discussion protocols we are using across all classrooms. In response to our communities needs we have adjusted the Annual Parent Workshop Calendar and are partnering with the NYC Commission on Human Rights to educate families on how to identify and report discrimination and respond to bias related incidents. All Students, Families and Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers and Support Personnel All Students, Families and Teachers November 2018 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers and Support Personnel All Students, Families and Teachers All Students, Families and Teachers November 2018- January 2019 March 2019 - June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers and Support Personnel Administration, Parent Coordinator and Teachers and Support Personnel 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Central Queens YM & YWHA, Rego Park Green Alliance, New York Hall of Science,Sports and Arts/ New York Edge Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Support Staff, Parents Association, Students Instructional Resources: Classroom Curriculum, Supplies for family events, Materials for the Arts supplies, Technology Schedule Adjustments will be made as necessary. Workshops will be held during the the seven period school day, after school, evenings and weekends to ensure all constituents have an opportunity to attend in order maximize participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 42  In February 2019 our school will show a 3% increase in participation in school events such as Parent Workshops/events and Parent-Teacher Conferences as measured by the attendance. Mid-year Progress Monitoring Update: (February 2019) As of February 2019, we met our mid-year goal.  As of February 2018, number of parent signatures recorded was 2,508  As of February 2019, the number of parent signatures recorded was 2,835  Data shows an increase of 13% participation at in school events from February 2018 to February 2019.  We exceeded our February goal of 3% by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will monitor the parent attendance log through attendance sign in sheets. In addition, we will take photographs and videos of events where parents participate. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one-to-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day coupled with an AIS After School tutoring Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades K -3 who are considered at risk for not meeting Standards as determined by their performance on Teachers College Running Records or have been identified as potential holdovers. Students in grades 4 and 5 who are performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on the New York State ELA. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Explicit instruction in skills and strategies needed to become independent readers is fostered. Strategies in K-2 include the multi-sensory Fundations program, echo reading, Readers Theatre, guided reading, shared reading, and interactive writing. In grades 3-5 small group instruction is embedded in all instruction. Classroom teachers continuously assess students and provide remediation and enrichment to meet students’ needs in Tier 1 settings. Learning styles and meta-cognitive approach to learning are emphasized. At risk students also receive Wilson support and Linda Mood Bell visualization and verbalization support. Students in grades 3-5 in need of additional assistance 2018-19 CEP 44 Small group, one- to- one tutoring During the school day coupled with an AIS After School Program Mathematics Students in grades 4-5 who are performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on the New York State Math Test to meet the Standards participate in small group instruction designed to meet students’ needs by using meaningful data to address strengths and areas of concern. Emphasis is placed on strengthening readers’ strategies using close reading approaches in the AIS After School program. Students not meeting the Standards are provided with weekly small group instruction in a pull-out model to assist them with acquiring strategies and skills needed to become successful. Repeated modeling and use of graphic organizers support students’ thinking work with math investigations. In addition, classroom teachers continuously assess students and provide data driven instruction for remediation. Teachers make use of Go Math’s Think Central- Soar to Success. Finally, students in need of additional assistance in order to meet the Standards participate in small group instruction designed to meet students’ needs with problem solving and math computation through 2018-19 CEP 45  Science Students in grades 4 and 5 who are performing Level 1 or Level 2 on the New York State ScienceExam. Social Studies Students in grades 4 and 5 who are performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on the New York State ELA and formative social studies assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria involves teacher recommendations, PPT meetings, RTI Team recommendations the AIS After School Program. Science support is given to students in investigation-based curriculum that targets academic vocabulary, scientific skills, and knowledge that can be applied toward the curriculum and State assessments. In addition, classroom teachers build content knowledge with science topics during the instructional day. Support in social studies is provided through content area literacy. Students learn strategies for success in nonfiction content reading and writing and apply these strategies toward opinion-based essays. Use of technology enhances instruction with research. Non-mandated counseling is provided to students to address social and academic skills, areas of need, and to improve students’ self-esteem, and school climate. Science support is given to small groups and one-to-one During the school day coupled with an AIS Science After School Program School day and AIS After School Program Social Studies support is given to students in small groups and one-to-one School day At-risk services are offered in small groups and one-to-one 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Currently nine students attending P.S. 139 are registered as Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47 The Title I set-aside funds will be utilized to provide STH with instructional materials and resources. The funds will also support the participation of STH in important experiential experiences through trips and enrichment activities. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3,223 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 50  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 52 N/A N/A N/A N/A I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 53 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: The focus of this, Title III Supplemental Program for English Language Learners, proposal is to enhance programs for Newcomers, Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) and Long-Term ELLs, as well as improving teaching and learning in core subject areas. We plan to provide supplemental language support services to the following categories of English language learners: ELLs who have been in the program for 4 years and more, as well as SIFE and English language learners struggling academically. Beginning December, we will offer to English language learners in grades 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, 12 afternoon 1 hour long sessions once a week where 2 dually certified ENL/content area teacher trained in ENL methodologies, will provide direct instruction in Reading, Mathematics, and Science by addressing four modalities: Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing using a co-teaching model or a self-contained model. We will use research-based strategies, practices, materials and curricula to strengthen literacy, mathematics and technology skills. For grades one, two and three we will offer a program which will guide children along a leveled continuum of reading, ensuring that they develop the necessary grade-level phonemic awareness and enhance reading comprehension skills. For English language learners in grades 4 and 5 we will focus on Writing to enhance student writing skills in the content area. For English language learners who have been in the program for 4 years and more we will offer support with the academic language and literacy skills to enhance student language, literacy and content understanding. To provide home language support we will expand our library of bilingual books in various genres and encourage the use of glossaries and bilingual dictionaries to increase comprehension. We will purchase and utilize the Imagine Learning program to supplement instruction. Imagine learning provides research-based, standards-aligned instruction, rigorous content that challenges students to grow, language support for English learners, adaptive learning paths that meet each student where they are and assessments and reports that drive quality instruction. For parents and guardians of our current and former English language learners, we will offer training on how parents can work with their child at home using Imagine Learning and a variety of academic and cultural activities to increase parental engagement in their child's education at PS 139Q . To ensure quality and success of the program, we will send notification letters to student homes in parent preferred language. We will maintain relevant records including, but not limited to parent response, pick up arrangements, as well as attendance rosters. Below is a full description of the supplemental support services we plan to utilize through the Title III funding for the 2018-2019 school year. Program 1:Target Population: Grade 1 ELLsTotal # on the Grade: 16; 12 will accept.18% of our first grade ELLs are on the Entering and Emerging levels. As evidenced by the most recent TC assessment, 67% of ELLs read below grade-level and are at serious academic risk. English language learners will engage in guided reading activities to enhance grade-level phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and reading comprehension skills through phonics focused books. This program will utilize the Essential Skills software along with other resources to provide students with tiered and differentiated instruction to meet their individual needs and boost their speaking, listening, writing, and reading skills. The ENL teacher will provide direct instruction to this group in collaboration with the content area teacher. The ENL teacher will share her expertise in language acquisition strategies and techniques and assist the content 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teacher in scaffolding of language and content through co-teaching model.Teachers: 1 licensed ENL teacher and 1 Content Area teacher Time: 2:30 PM – 3:30 PM WednesdayMaterials to be used: Printed materials, Leveled books for Guided Reading instruction, Imagine Learning, I-Pads, consumables (composition notebooks, paper, etc.)Program 2: Target Population: Grade 2 ELLs; Total # on the grade: 21; 18 will accept29% of the second grade English language learners are on the Entering and Emerging language acquisition levels. 90% of ELLs read way below grade level, as evidenced by the recent TC assessment and need support. This program is intended to provide English language learners with additional support in reading instruction. English language learners will engage in guided reading activities to enhance grade-level phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and reading comprehension skills through phonics focused books, narrative, and informational texts. This program will utilize the Imagine Learning software program to provide students with tiered and differentiated instruction to meet their individual needs and boost their speaking, listening, and reading skills. We will also encourage the native language support.The ENL teacher will provide direct instruction to this group in collaboration with the content area teacher. The ENL teacher will share her expertise in language acquisition strategies and techniques and assist the content area teacher in scaffolding of language and content. Teachers: 1 licensed ENL teacher Time: 2:30 PM – 3:30 PM WednesdayMaterials to be used: Printed materials, Imagine Learning, MyOn web-based program laptops, consumables (composition notebooks, paper, etc.)Program 3: Target Population: Grade 3 ELLs Total # on the grade: 21; 18 will accept15% of ELLs are on Entering and Emerging language acquisition levels. 73% of ELLs read way below grade level, as evidenced by the recent TC assessment and need support. 17 ELLs (81%) out of 21 students on the grade will take the standardized tests in ELA and 21 ELLs (100%) will be tested in Mathematics this spring for the first time. This program is intended to focus on reinforcing academic vocabulary development, dictionary skills, and test taking skills in ELA and Math. Grade 3 English language learners will receive direct instruction in vocabulary development (including academic language), listening and speaking through series of engaging activities including but not limited to reading graphs, identifying patterns, and solving open ended word problems and communicating their knowledge through peer to peer interaction using academic discourse. In addition to English as the primary language of instruction, we will provide native language support by utilizing dictionaries and bilingual glossaries in student-preferred language. The ENL teacher will provide direct instruction to this group in collaboration with the content area teacher. The ENL teacher will share her expertise in language acquisition strategies and techniques and assist the content area teacher in scaffolding of language and content. Teachers: 1 licensed ENL teacher and 1 Content Area TeacherTime: 2:30 PM – 3:00 PM ThursdayMaterials to be used: Imagine Learning program, non-fiction library, dictionaries consumables (composition notebooks, paper, folders, etc.)Program 4:Target Population: Grade 4 ELLs Total # of Current ELLs on the grade: 25; 18 will accept25% of the ELLs are on Entering and Emerging levels. 81% of students read way below grade level and need support. 54% of current ELLs have been in the program for 3 years or more. 77% of current ELLs who took the NYS 2018 ELA test and 74% of those who took the NYS Math 2018 test, scored levels 1 and 2. This program is intended to provide additional English language and content area support to the grade 4 ELLs who have been in the program for three years and more and struggle academically. The ENL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher will provide direct instruction, in a co-teaching fashion, in vocabulary development through ELA, Mathematics and Science content areas with emphasis on the content area discourse. The focus of instruction will be building background knowledge through intensive use of non-fiction texts, reinforcement of dictionary skills, and hands on approach with native language support. We will 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information supply our students with bilingual glossaries in Math and Science. We will utilize the Imagine Learning program to supplement instruction.The ENL teacher will provide direct instruction to this group in collaboration with the classroom teacher. The ENL teacher will share her expertise in language acquisition strategies and techniques and assist the content area teacher in scaffolding of language and content. Teachers: 1 licensed ENL teacher Time: 2:30 PM – 3:30 PM ThursdayMaterials to be used: Imagine Learning, Classroom libraries, dictionaries, translated glossaries, consumables (notebooks. writing paper, folders, pencils, highlighters, etc.)Program 5:Target Population: Grade 5 English Language LearnersTotal # of Current ELLs on the grade: 20; 15 will accept40% of the current 5th grade ELLs have been in the program from 4 to 5 years. 93% of those who took the Spring 2018 NYS ELA and 87% who took the 2016 NYS Math tests scored levels 1 and 2. 88% of ELLs read way below grade level, as evidenced by the recent TC assessment and need support.This program is intended to provide additional English language and content area support to the current English language learners. The focus of this program is to reinforce student reading and writing skills through explicit direct instruction. The ESL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher will provide direct instruction, using a co-teaching model, in vocabulary development through ELA, Mathematics and Science content areas with emphasis on the content area discourse. The ENL teacher will share her expertise in language acquisition strategies and techniques and assist the content area teacher in scaffolding of language and content. The focus of instruction will be building background knowledge through intensive use of non-fiction texts, reinforcement of dictionary skills, and hands on approach with native language support. We will supply our students with bilingual glossaries in Math and Science. Teachers: 1 licensed ENL teacher Time: 2:30 PM – 3:30 PM; ThursdayMaterial to be used: Imagine Learning, laptops, language dictionaries, and consumables (notebooks, writing paper, folders, pencils, highlighters, etc.) rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: We will be providing ongoing professional development to inform and train teachers involved in the Title III ENL Program, as well as those responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. In addition to general orientation in the Title III Supplemental Support Services, the personnel involved will learn about ENL methodologies, strategies, and techniques in developing academic language, building prior knowledge, both inhouse and outside the school. Teachers register and attend workshops offered through the DOE Office of English Language Learners, professional development and instructional support provided by the Borough Field Office Support Specialists to both ENL and classroom teachers. To support the Integrated ENL/ELA component we will focus on ENL strategies for classroom teachers, differentiated instruction and scaffolding techniques to address the academic needs of ELLs, 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development including, but not limited to best practices in collaborative team teaching, and other relevant workshops. Our ENL teachers closely collaborate with the school learning community and are instrumental in providing suggestions and strategies for particular areas of curriculum that would be useful for the teacher of an ELL student. The staff finds multiple entry points of access in the curriculum. The teachers will also receive training on Imagine Learning and how to best use it in the classroom. We utilize 80 minutes of professional development time, Chancellor's Conference Days for staff development, after and during school day to provide ELL training for classroom teachers though presentations, as well as the combination of study groups and lab sites. Our ENL teachers will provide ongoing professional development during the eighty minute professional learning sessions. This professional development will be ongoing throughout the entire school year. In addition, we will provide three one hour sessions, professional development sessions for teachers involved in the Title III program. Topics include, but are not limited to: · · · · language · · · · community. In addition, ENL and content area teachers will articulate the needs of ELLs in planning instruction, as well as in preparation for the NYS assessments in ELA, Math, and Science. The Integrated&nbsp;ENL/ELA&nbsp;component &nbsp;Co-Teaching Model; Designing Effective Curriculum to Address Student Needs; Principles of Effective Instruction for English Language Learners Workshops on Academic English Language Development with emphasis on scaffolding Vocabulary for ELLs through reading, writing, listening, and speaking by using visuals; The Common Core Learning Standards and Expectations for ELLs; Testing Accommodations for ELLs and Former ELLs; English Language Learners and New York State ELA &amp; Math Tests for the school rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: To promote student learning we offer a variety of engagement activities to assist parents and guardians of our English language learners to enhance parent/school communication. The Parent Program will consist of 12 workshops, 90 minutes long each, exact month and days to be determined by parent coordinator. One of the licensed ENL teachers will be facilitating the Parental Engagement Activities, in order to help parents adjust to the school community. Parent notiftications will be provided by the School staff which already provides notification of other events in the home language. Translation services will also be provided by the School staff and augmented by the DOE translation services helpline. Two ipads are set up in the office capable for translation services. Parents will be provided with strategies to allow them to reinforce academic behaviors associated with the P.S. 139 school community. Workshop providers are but 2018-19 CEP 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities not limited to Tanya Ravnic, ENL coordinator dually certified in ENL and Content area, Ornella Dabool, ENL coordinator, certified in ENL,Nina Lipton, parent coordinator and DOE language translation providers and P.S. 139 School staff. Parents will be invited to the informational workshops about school goals, programs, forthcoming city and state assessments in order for them to support their children. We will offer various activities including but not limited to: · · · · system,&nbsp; · · Our staff is willing and able to provide adequate language support to parents based on need. workshops focusing on wellness and nutrition, homework help ways to communicate with the classroom teacher, how to support English language acquisition, navigating the &nbsp;public school cultural activities such as trips to&nbsp;museums, landmarks, and places and events. Training&nbsp;on how to use Imagine Learning at home. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem Per Session: $9,210.00 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Service: Program 1: One ENL teacher and One Content Area Teacher for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions: $ 61.00x2x1x15= $1,830.00 Program 2: One ENL teacher for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions: $61.00x1x1x15= $915.00 One Supervisor for 1 hour long (60 min.) for 15 sessions on Wednesday for Programs 1 and 2, as well as Parent Engagement Program. Note: There are no other after-school programs being held on that day. Supervisor's official work hours are from 7 AM to 3 PM. $63.00x1x15=$945.00 Program 3: One ENL teacher and 1 Content Area teacher for 1 hour (60 minutes) for 15 sessions: $61.00x2x1x15= $1,830.00 2018-19 CEP 59  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Program 4: One ENL teacher for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions: $61.00x1x1x15= $915.00 Program 5 One ENL teacher for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions: $61.00x1x1x15= $915.00 Supervision: One Supervisor for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions on Thursdays for Programs 3, 4, and 5. Note: There are no other after school programs being held on this day. Supervisor's official work hours are from 7 AM to 3 PM. $63.00x1x15=$ 945.00 Parent Engagement: One ENL teacher for 1 hour long (60 minutes) for 15 sessions on Wednesdays: $61.00x1x15=$915.00 A one hour long Professional Development session for teachers involved in the Title III program $61.00x1x4=$244.00 Consumables; iPads, Imagine Learning $244.00 $4,202 Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $3,344.00 0.00 Imagine Learning no cost to program 2018-19 CEP 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a $17,000.00 Other TOTAL 0.00 $17,000.00 2018-19 CEP 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name The Rego Park School Borough Queens School Number 139 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Natalie Perez-Hernandez Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Khanna Borukhov/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Ravnic Teacher/Subject Area Tiffany Martin Related-Service Provider Elizabeth Sparling Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Stephanie Lazarus Coach School Counselor Justine Bono Parent Yaremie Durand Parent Coordinator Nina Lipton/LAC Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) Ornella Roselli Dabool/ENL Tea C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 755 2018-19 CEP 62 Total number of ELLs 140 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To guide instructional planning for English language learners, throughout the school year we use, the following formative, as well as curriculum embedded assessments such as TCRWP Running Records, Unit Assessments (Pre-, Mid-, and Post-), Checklists, Exit Slips, Questioning, Conversations, Observations, as well as formal and informal teacher created assessments addressing Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing modalities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Planning for ELL students is supported through the use of structures, strategies, and techniques such as: "Think-Jot-Pair-Share", "Write-Pair-Share", "See-Think-Wonder", "Exit Slip", "S.C.A.M.P.E.R", language notes, "T.A.P.P.L.E"., and others. During Independent Work Time students communicate with the teacher using color-coded cards, where Red indicates that student needs additional support to better understand the concept; Yellow shows that the assignment needs more clarification so the 2018-19 CEP 63  students understand expectations, while Green signals that the assignment is just right for the student to work independently. We also use Self and Peer Reflection, use data from pre- and post- assessments to create "Next Step" goals for students. Students review next steps goals daily prior to the lesson. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To establish a baseline, to analyze growth, and identify areas of need, we use NYS ELA and Math results in the beginning of the school year. Item Analysis provides us with information about the gaps in student learning. We also use NYSESLAT results to compare student progress in all modalities from year to year. Throughout the school year we carefully monitor the Independent Reading levels progression results (September, November, January, March and June) and analyze student progress in Reading in order to provide targeted intervention. We also gather data from the NYC Performance Tasks (MoSL) in both ELA and Mathematics (Baseline, Mid Year and End of Year) to inform and shape instructional decisions . 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessment data, both classroom and school level, is made available to teachers . This data is used by teacher teams to inform and guide instructional moves. For example, along with Guided reading we offer the Achieve 3000 program for all ELLs in grades 2-5. Based on multiple data sources we form small groups of ELLs to target areas of critical need and provide intervention using appropriate scaffolds.In addition to small group instruction we enhance both reading and comprehension skills through Tier 1 RtI and A.I.S. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We adopted the RtI, an instructional model that aims at prevention and early intervention through tiered system of instructional support. RtI adds layers of instructional support to the Common Core curriculum delivered in school, based on demonstrated and changing needs of the student learners. ENL/ESL program is a mandated service and is a part of Tier 1. Our ELLs fit the profile needing instruction and targeted intervention in vocabulary and comprehension skills. For our struggling readers in particular, we develop skill-based and knowledge-based competencies, as well as foundational knowledge to enable ELLs to access the text and make meaning of it. Using Progress Monitoring as a tool, we collect data on the level of mastery of the target skill. That informs further steps. For Tier 2 "Double Dose" we provide additional support in a small group setting. We use ENL methodologies, to focus on areas of critical need. For Tier 3 - "Intensive Intervention" we offer either one-on-one tutoring or intensive, individualized instruction tailored to student learning needs. To identify at-risk ELLs in a specific skill we use formal and informal formative assessments tied to curriculum and daily instruction. It is largely driven by teacher observation, quizzes, student writing samples. Grade level instructional teams carefully monitor student progress, discuss findings and identify ways to support the child struggling academically. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the 2017 NYSESLAT results, 14.5% of ELLs are at Commanding level, 39.3% at Expanding level, 21.4% at Transitioning level, 11.4% of ELLs are at Emergent and 3.4% at Entering level. Based on NYS ELA and Math Results 5% of ELLs, scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on ELA and 1.4% scored level 1 or 2 on Math. These results help us group students and provide targeted interventions to ensure rigorous and high quality instruction to accelerate English language acquisition and close the achievement gap. 2018-19 CEP 64  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Language Allocation Policy Committee reports data to school administration, and grade teams. Co-teaching partners as well as collaborating teachers together with ENL/ESL specialists analyze the data and make necessary adjustments to the curriculum, unit plans, and daily lesson planning to address student learning needs and to accelerate student academic achievement. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction is delivered through the combination of the Intergrated ENL/ELA and Stand Alone ENL models. Both current and former ELLs are grouped by grade heterogeneously. Standalone ENL model is delivered by both ENL and dually certified teachers for ELLs who are at Entering and Emerging proficiency levels. ENL teachers provide one unit of English language-acquisition-focused instruction which is aligned with curriculum to ensure continuity of the classroom instruction. The Integrated ENL/ELA (Co-Teaching) model is delivered by the ENL and General Education Classroom teachers. The instruction includes content area subject matter and English language development instruction through the use of ENL strategies. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with the General Education teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. Dually Certified (ENL and General Ed) teachers provide Integrated ENL instruction to English language learners in collaboration with their classroom teachers. We provide common planning time for collaborating teachers, as well as co-teaching partners to develop unit plans and daily lesson plans to ensure rigor and alignment of instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We carefully review the CR PART 154-2 (K-8) English as a New Language (ENL) Units of Study and Staffing Requirements, and program our ELLs accordingly. Thus, for Entering ELLs we will provide 360 minutes of instruction with a minimum of 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. For Emerging ELLs the same 360 minutes of mandated instruction will be distributed as follows: minimum of 90 minutes for Standalone ENL along with 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA with additional 90 minutes of either Standalone or Integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. For Transitioning and Expanding ELLs we will provide a total of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA a week. Transitioning ELLs will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of Standalone or Integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area, while Expanding ELLs will receive a minimum of 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding, who fall into a category of Former ELLs, will receive a minimum of 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area for two years, as well as testing accommodations on the New York State and City assessments. 2018-19 CEP 65  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, ENL/ESL teachers in collaboration with Content Area specialists use research based instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to maximize student language development. ENL/ESL teachers meet regularly with content area teachers in order to align their instruction with that of the classroom teachers and successfully scaffold education for ELLs. In addition to content objectives, collaborating teachers identify language objectives to align them to the Common Core Learning standards. The English Language Arts and Literacy Common Core Learning Standards are used by ENL/ESL teachers to focus on literacy across the content areas. ENL/ESL teachers confer with the Science and Computer Science/Technology teachers as well as content vocabulary and concepts for ELLs. Teachers provide scaffolded instruction for the different units in Reading and Writing. In addition, pertinent thematic units are taught. ENL teachers provide differentiated instruction to help students improve their Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing skills through the use of educational technology, thinking maps, picture cues, and graphic organizers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For students found eligible for English language services and whose Home language is Spanish, we administer Spanish LAB to identify their Native language skills. For students with special needs, bilingual specialists assess student's native language skills using appropriate language instruments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our ELLs come with diverse profiles of learning needs. We will be focusing on high quality instruction to meet the needs of all students. We will address skill-based, as well as content based competencies through more intensive instruction, which involves not only instructional time and smaller instructional groups, but also is precisely targeted at the right level of student language acquisition. To help accelerate learning and close the achievement gap, we will be systematically using the following key components of the powerful instruction such as providing clearer and more detailed explanations, corrective feedback, guided practice, and instructional sequences. In addition, ENL/ESL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers, will provide differentiation to support various sub-groups of ELLs like SIFE, Newcomer, Long-Term ELL, etc., succeed with the Common Core Learning Standards. a).This school year we do not have any SIFE students. However, according to our plan, these students will be placed in age appropriate classrooms; we will pair the SIFE with a peer who speaks his/her language. The SIFE will be given equal access to participate in all student activities and receive Title III and AIS services, as well as the support of the Guidance Counselor and bilingual social worker. We will give students intensive instruction in building literacy skills and vocabulary development in a small group setting. b). We assess newcomer ELL literacy skills and exercise a differentiated approach to assist him/her as they acclimate to the school environment, and build or transfer their academic skills. Since P.S. 139 uses the Balanced Literacy approach, in grades K-5, the ENL teachers also follow the Balanced Literacy Workshop model using the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project in grades K-2 and the Expeditionary Learning Program in grades 3-5. Expeditionary Learning has an addendum for ELLs and the classroom teacher is provided with web based supplementary materials for the newcomer ELLs. In order to differentiate for our new comers, teachers provide scaffolds such as: pictures, language prompts, native language texts, peer partnerships, technology supports through auditory texts, etc. We distribute to students available bilingual glossaries in Content Areas and make sure students have a dictionary in his/her home language on them during and after school hours. We 2018-19 CEP 66  closely monitor their progress both in English language acquisition and in the content areas through formal and informal assessments, conference notes, and conversations. We also reach out to parents to consolidate home/school connection. requires testing for ELLs in the system for more than 1 year, our ELLs are part of the before/after school academic intervention program. Throughout the school year, they are also pulled in small groups by a reading and/or math specialist for added support. During the summer, our ELL are offered the opportunity to attend summer school for enrichment to sharpen their skills. C. Differentiation of Instruction for developing ELL students: D. Differentiation of instruction for long-term ELL students: Presently, we do not have Long Term ELLs who completed 6 years in the ENL program. At P.S. 139 we were able to help our long term ELLs to reach the mandated level of proficiency and exit the ENL/ESL program. Our interventions such as At-Risk academic support services, RtI, Title III, AIS support classes in Reading, Math, and Social Studies, and small group instruction by a content area specialist, proved themselves highly effective, as well as emotional and mental support provided by the Guidance Counselor and Social Worker. We were able to turn parents into our partners and that contributed to our success as well. e). After our English language learners reach the mandated level of proficiency based on the NYSESLAT results and move to the category of Former ELLs, we provide them with transitional support up to two years in and outside the classroom through Integrated content area instruction. To enhance their academic English language skills, we enroll them in the academic support groups where content area specialists, trained in ESL methodologies, provide targeted direct instruction in a small group setting for the total of 90 minutes twice a week. In addition, they are invited to the short-term Academic Intervention Support (AIS) group to prepare for the NYS standardized tests in ELA, Math, and Science.. For native language support during NYS Math and Science tests students are given a translated version of the test provided by the NYSED. For the rest of the students, we offer word-to-word dictionaries and/or bilingual glossaries in corresponding languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To provide access to the academic content and accelerate English language development our ELL-SWD are mainstreamed into age-appropriate classes and are introduced to a rigorous curriculum to maximize learning through Standalone and Integrated ENL instruction as specified in CR Part 154. Some of our ELLs have alternate placement paraprofessionals who aid in their instruction. ELL-SWDs have full access to all the supplemental academic programs offered in our school. During the ENL instruction we use the Balanced Literacy approach. The emphasis is placed on the acquisition of social and academic vocabulary taught through ENL strategies such as Total Physical Response (TPR), language experience approach. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, we will use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility by: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. a.)-e) For S.I.F.E., newcomers, developing, and long-term ENL students, students receive the targeted intervention approaches including:Our school has a variety of targeted intervention programs for all ELLs in ELA, Math, and Science. The following supports are in place for all ENL subgroups that are eligible for New York State assessments: 2018-19 CEP 67  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be implementing mandates and recommendations set forth in CR 154 Requirements for the English as a New Language Program. Based on data and trends, we are considering implementing Imagine Learning in the upcoming school year. In addition, during planning and preparation we will emphasize using the strategies in the ELL Expeditionary Learning ELL addendum. We will continue to group students heterogeneously as opposed to previous practices of placing students in a self-contained classroom. ELLs are distributed among all classes on each grade based on the level of language proficiency. Classroom teachers will be given all the support and resources, and professional development to become skilled in ENL methodologies. We will continue emphasis on teacher collaboration and ongoing articulation among ENL/ESL and classroom teachers to help ELLs excel. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? During Parent Orientation meetings we make parents aware of different language support programs offered in New York City public schools. Since PS 139Q is a multi-ethnic and multilingual school, we do not have adequate amount of students in two consecutive grades speaking the same language for us to open a bilingual program. If parents request Transitional Bilingual or Dual Language programs, then we contact DELLS and assist parents to transfer a child to the available language support program of their choice. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English language learners have equal access to all programs, services, extracurricular activities, and enrichment opportunities. Our ELLs serve on the Student Council, are members of the Glee Club and Music Memory Team, and members of the school basketball team and soccer team. They are active participants in the International Festival, as well as Art and Dance, and Enrichment programs (chess, guitar, karate, etc.). They take advantage of the Academic Support programs including, but not limited to, Title III ENL, AIS, as well as small group instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instructional materials to support English language learners. This school year we will continue implementing the Expeditionary Learning program for grades 3, 4, and 5.The ELL component, built into the program, will be utilized to help students master their vocabulary development and reading comprehension skills. We were able to build our leveled libraries in different genres, including nonfiction in order to support content area instruction in Science, Social Studies and Mathematics. We have a collection of Big Books for Read Alouds aligned with curriculum. We continue purchasing dual language books in various languages, as well as language and picture dictionaries through school and Title III funds. We have also purchased the network version of the Rosetta Stone program, so new admits could learn English independently using this program. We encourage ELLs in primary grades to take advantage of the free on-line Starfall program. In addition to Achieve3000 program used for upper grades, we are planning to purchase software from Imagine Learning for primary grades to enhance student phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding skills, as well as reading comprehension skills. We actively use the "A to Z" and MyOn websites to enhance student reading and comprehension skills. ENL classrooms are equipped with computers that have Internet access. Laptops and iPads were purchased for the ENL program through Title III funds. We will continue acquisition and use of technology tools to amplify student learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program model, the native language support is given a high priority. The use of glossaries and dictionaries is being taught and encouraged. Newly admitted English as New language learners are paired with students speaking the same language. Our school, as well as classroom libraries, have books in languages other than English. Students are encouraged to read books in their native language and 2018-19 CEP 68  reflect that in their Reading logs until they become literate in the English language. The largest language groups represented among ELLs are Spanish and Russian. Our teachers and staff are fluent in Chinese, Korean, Bengali, Albanian, Farsi, Haitian-Creole, Italian, Russian, Bulgarian, Urdu, Serbo-Croatian, Portuguese, Hindi and other languages. We recruit parent volunteers to assist parents of the newly arrived English language learners to feel comfortable and play an active role in our school community. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At PS 139Q English language learners are provided with opportunities to achieve the same educational goals and standards as the general student population. In accordance with the provisions of CR Part 154, we provide our English language learners equal access to all school programs and services commensurate with their ages and grade level. All of our required support services for our ELL's correspond with their appropriate ages and grade levels. The curriculum, resources, and support materials are age and grade appropriate and help our ELL's excel academically. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? . We are a co-location site with District 75 inclusion program, PS 177Q. Administrators at both locations collaborate to ensure that all students are properly identified and serviced. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our newly enrolled English language learners are offered te opportunity to attend a summer school program for ELLs for them to acquire and maintain more language skills during the summer months. In addition to the educational program, students are given an opportunity to develop social skills to enhance language learning. Throughout the school year, ELLs are involved in the same activities as their mainstreamed peers in school. Arts, music, sports, trips and additional need based academic support is offered before, during and after school. We buddy them up with English proficient peers who speak the same language. ELLs have access to classroom libraries, where they can borrow books in their native language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 69  We will be providing an ongoing direct and indirect professional development to ELL personnel at the school, as well as those responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. The personnel involved will learn about ENL/ESL methodologies, strategies, and techniques in developing academic language, building prior knowledge, both in house and outside the school. Teachers register and attend workshops offered through the DOE Office of English Language Learners, professional development and instructional support provided by the ENL Borough Support Specialist to both ENL and classroom teachers. ENL strategies for classroom teachers, differentiated instruction for ELLs, collaborative team teaching, and other relevant activities are the focus of those workshops. The following is a tentative calendar for 2018-19 Professional Development for all ELL-related services: Classroom and ENL/ESL Teachers are a part of Instructional Cohort of the ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI) and Mini Language Development Institute (MLDI), as well as ELL Compliance Institute offered by ELL Team at Queens South Field Support Center and Office of DELLS, regularly attend meetings and turn key their learning to teachers and staff. A Team of ENL/ESL and Classroom teachers working with English language learners are a part of ELL Vertical team. They meet regularly to analyze student work, exchange ideas and effective strategies to enhance student learning and shape instruction. We utilize 80 minutes of professional development time, Chancellor's Conference Days for staff development, and after and during the school day, to provide ELL training for classroom teachers through presentations, as well as the combination of study groups and lab.sites. In addition to that, ENL/ESL and content area teachers articulate the needs of ELLs in planning instruction, as well as in preparation for the NYS assessments in ELA, Math, and Science. ENL/ESL teachers also provide input on language objectives, as well as appropriate language scaffolds for the grade curricular unit plans. Our ENL teachers closely collaborate with the school learning community and are instrumental not only in aligning ENL instruction to the classroom instruction, but also in providing suggestions and strategies for particular areas of curriculum that would be useful for the teacher of an ELL student. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide opportunities for professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. They address both language development and new language acquisition and focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. In accordance with CR Part 154.2, more than 15% of total hours is dedicated to ELL-specific professional development. ENL teachers also participate in opportunities offered by the BFSC and DELLSS to further their learning. As a result, ENL teachers meet and exceed the requirement for 50% of total hours of dedicated ELL-specific professional development. Each session comes with an agenda and a sign-in sheet. These records along with PD handouts are kept in a Professional Development Folder in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 139 has an open door policy, and is welcoming to all parents. We provide home language support to those in need . We have eliminated language barrier at PS 139 by installing two Translation stations that consists of two iPads with language apps in the main office for school staff to communicate with a visitor in their preferred language. In addition, we take advantage of 2018-19 CEP 70  the over the phone translation through the Translation and Interpretation unit. Parents are welcomed and are included in every aspect of the school life. Parents are part of the School Leadership Team, the LAP Committee, and the Safety Committee. The Parent Coordinator conducts workshops and makes certain that all school policy notices are translated into the major language groups and translation services are offered to those who need them. We meet with individual parents each week during an allotted 40 minute parent engagement time to discuss goals of the program, the child's language development progress, English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. A group of parent volunteers assists parents new to the system in their native language. Parents are invited to attend all class trips and assembly programs. We have writing and publishing celebrations to which all parents are invited. Our parent attendance at teacher conferences is very high. We ask for and honor all requests for translators. Our collaboration with the Parents' Association is extremely productive. Our teachers regularly attend meetings to explain initiatives and speak on key issues. We offer Adult English classes to parents and guardians through Title III funding. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Sign-in sheets from each individual meeting or events for ELL parents are kept in a binder by the ELL and Parent Coordinators . To promote student learning we offer a variety of engagement activities targeted toward assisting parents and guardians of our English language learners to enhance parent/school communication and attendance. Parents will be provided with strategies to use with their children to support instruction. The ENL team created a brochure that provides information on apps, websites, online games, and other tech programs that parents can use at home to support their child in their English language development. Workshops provide parents with instruction on how to use the technology. Parents are invited to the informational workshops about school goals, programs, forthcoming city and state assessments in order for them to adequately support their own children. Thus, we are planning to survey parents to identify the areas they would be interested in. The surveys will be sent out in the parent preferred language of written communication. Our ELL parents are invited to attend district-wide workshops, and the annual ELL Conference. We will offer various activities including, but not limited to, workshops focusing on wellness and nutrition, homework help, ways to communicate with the classroom teacher, how to support English language acquisition, navigating the public school system so the students will be college and career ready, as well as cultural activities such as trips to museums, landmarks, and places and/or events. Our ELL community is incorporated into our school culture through translated documents, interpretation services, and a welcoming atmosphere. Our staff is willing and able to provide language support to parents based on need, as specified in the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) and updated blue cards. We keep records of all staff who speak a language other than English to assist parents and children in their preferred language. If additional interpretation services are needed, we have over-the-phone translation services via the Translation Interpretation Unit, we use volunteers, and/or hire outside personnel as necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Natalie Perez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Rego Park School School DBN: 28Q139 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Natalie Perez-Hernandez Principal Lazarus Stephanie Assistant Principal Nina Lipton Parent Coordinator Khanna Borukhov ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yaremie Durand Parent Tanya Ravnic Teacher/Subject Area Tiffany Martin Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Justine Bono School Counselor Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Joshua Metz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ornella Rosselli-Dabool Other ENL/ESL Teacher Anthony Valentino Other UFT Chapter Leader Elizabeth Sparling Other IEP Coordinator 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 06/21/18 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q139 School Name: The Rego Park School Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nina Khanna Lipton Borukhov Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher/ELL Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs, we have the following system in place: At registration, parents fill out a Home Language Identification Survey where they indicate the preferred language for written and oral communication.This information is entered into the A.T.S. system and the student emergency card. In addition to that, teachers survey parents to find out whether they need an interpreter to enhance communication. Parents are made aware regarding their right to and the availability of language services through the poster displayed in the lobby, as well as in the main office. To assess the school's need in translated materials we download data from A.T.S. and identify what languages are represented in our school for the current school year, and how they are distributed among the grades and classes. We resort to both internal and external resources to accommodate translation and interpretation needs of the limited English proficient parents in order to provide opportunities to access programs and services pivotal to their child’s education. In house, we survey 2018-19 CEP 75  our teachers and staff to identify their command in languages other than English. In addition to that, we identify parent volunteers willing to provide need-based oral and written translations. We also include substitute teachers and paraprofessionals into our in house translator and interpreter pool. Before major school functions, such as Parent Teacher conferences, we survey teachers to identify the need in translators and interpreters. Our School Parent Coordinator, who also serves as one of school Language Access Coordinators, creates a communication schedule and makes it available to the school community. In case of low incident languages, we provide teachers and parents with opportunities for over-the-phone interpretation. We take advantage of the services offered by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit including, but not limited to, written translations of documents containing critical information regarding student education, over-the phone interpreting services, and others. In addition to that, we plan to add more in-house tools like iPads for the on-the-spot translation through Google Translate and head sets for simultaneous translation for the group of parents who require translation and interpretation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian 4 American Sign Language 0 Arabic Bulgarian Burmese Cantonese Chinese (any) English French Gujarati Hindi Indonesian (a.k.a. Bahasa) Japanese Mandarin Polish Portuguese Russian Serbian Spanish Tadzhik (a.k.a. Tadjik) Thai Uzbek Vietnamese 5 3 2 0 42 737 1 0 1 1 1 0 4 0 81 2 111 0 1 5 2 0.4% 0 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.0% 4.21 73.85 0.1 0 0.1% 0.1 0.1% 0.0 0.4 0.0% 8.12 0.2 11.12 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.3 4 4 4 3 2 2 13 742 1 1 1 1 1 21 3 1 69 0 115 1 1 10 2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.3 74.35 0.1 0.1 0.1% 0.1 0.1% 2.1 0.3 0.1 6.91 0.0 11.52 0.1 0.1 1 0.3 2018-19 CEP 76  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of ELL Parent Notification Letters Based on Enrollment Letters to Parents from School Administration September 2017 - June 2018 Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Four Times a year Flyers and Announcements about school events September 7, 2017 - June 28, 2018 Information about NYS Assessment Dates January 2018 -March 2018 School Calendar; Brochures, Flyers, etc. September 7, 2017 - June 28, 2018 Principal Book of the Month Flyer September 2017 - June 2018 translated documents to parents. Translation/Interpretation Services, bilingual staff, parent volunteers, outside vendor; i.e. The Big Word Bilingual staff; Translation/Interpretation Services, Google Translate, parent volunteers, outside vendor, i.e., The Big Word Bilingual Staff; Translation/Interpretation Services, Common templates,Blackboard Connect Messaging System , Parent Volunteers Blackboard Connect Messaging System, Remind.com, Google Translate - checked for accuracy, bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation/Interpretation Unit, outside vendors, i.e., The Big Word In-House; Translation/Interpretation Unit, Parent Meetings with bilingual staff and.or parent volunteers, Blackboard Connect Messaging System In-House; Translation/Interpretation Unit, Google Translate , outside vendors, i.e. The Big Word In-House - Bilingual Staff, Parent Volunteers, Translation /Interpretation Unit, Google Translate; outside vendors, i.e. The Big Word 2018-19 CEP 77  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September 7, 2017 Parent Teacher Conferences September 7, 2017 - March 2018 Parent Engagement Tuesdays Daily Board , weekly email ELL Parent Orientation August 30, 2017 - June 28, 2018 Parent Engagement Events & Workshops September 18, 2017- June 28, 2018 Teacher Outreach to Parents via email, over the phone, in person September 2017 - June 2018 Home Language Identification Process: Parent & Child Interview at School Registration August 2017 - June 2018 Face-to-Face IEP Meetings September 2017 - June 2018 School Performances October 2017 - June 2018 interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Services,Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages, OSLIS Unit Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Services, Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages, Office of Sign Language & Interpretation (OSLIS) Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Unit, Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages, OSLIS Unit Bilingual staff, parent volunteers,Translation & Interpretation Services, T & I Video, Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Services,Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages, OSLIS Unit Bilingual staff, Parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Services, Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages, OSLIS Unit Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Services, Over-the-phone interpretation service for covered & non-covered languages Bilingual staff, Translation & Interpretation Unit, The Big Word Bilingual staff, parent volunteers, Translation & Interpretation Unit, OSLIS Unit 2018-19 CEP 78  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Families of all languages will be contacted with our Blackboard Connect Messaging System and Remind.com which translates the parents preferred language, Bilingual staff, Google Translate, Email, parent volunteers, T & I Unit, OSLIS Unit Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and share resources about language assistance services available to meet the compliance, school administration includes information about available resources to minimize language barrier between family and school into the PS 139Q Staff Handbook. In addition to that, School Language Access Coordinators provide informational training to teachers and staff on how to use available resources. They also give detailed instructions on how to use over-the-phone translation. The Language Access Coordinator makes her cell phone available to teachers and staff in case of need. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents are informed of their rights to translation services both in oral and in writing form. During each parent meeting, parents receive translation services to minimize language barrier. Posters giving information about Department of Education translation services are displayed for parent view. A sign in each of the appropriate covered languages indicating the availability of language services is posted in the lobby and main office. Parents are provided with translated versions of the Parent Bill of Rights and the Family Guide . We maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent, both in ATS and on the student emergency card. We keep accurate records regarding the provision of language assistance services in order to monitor progress when contacting a child’s household. Teachers and staff are aware of available both in-house and external resources to minimize language barrier between school and family. This system in place supports unexpected visits from parents who cannot communicate proficiently in English. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We witness growing parental involvement and increased communication between parents and school community. More parents are willing to come to school and get involved in their child's learning. The latest school survey indicates high level of parent satisfaction with school. Minimizing the language barrier through the use of both internal and 2018-19 CEP 79  external language support systems has a positive impact on school culture. It strategically strengthens the home-school connection. 2018-19 CEP 80 
