2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q140 School Name: P.S. 140 EDWARD K ELLINGTON Principal: DAVID NORMENT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Edward K. Ellington School 28Q140 342800010140 Pre – K - 5 School Number (DBN): 166 – 01 116 th Avenue Jamaica NY 11434 718-657-4760 718-526-1051 Phone Number: David Norment Fax: Dnorment@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: David Norment Yosefiah Campbell Tiffany Moore Robyn Signal ThieannaEstremera n/a* District Information Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd Msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2622 Phone Number: 718-557-2617 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MarleneWilks Executive Director: 82-01RockawayBlvd #4Fl, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917 520 6743 Phone Number: 718 281 3509 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) David Norment Yosefiah Campbell Tiffany Moore N/A ThieannaEstremera N/A N/A Robyn Signal Tina Lewis-Elserafy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ CSA Representative Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Megan Mundaca Patricia Lucas Idris Murray Tiffany Craddock SharineBarnes Gary Frazier N/A N/A N/A Teacher UFTMember Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Overall in ELA students did not meet standard relating to questions in which students were being asked to infer. We also noticed that students understanding of the question being asked was challenging. Based on the results of our internal assessments and the June 2018 Instructional Report, word meaning, text features and structures and Theme were areas for improvement. These skills will be a focus of our building and will function through a focus on improving Critical Thinking. In Math, students struggled with using tools solve word problems with fractions and subtraction. It was clear that that their was a clear correlation between students ability to read and success on the state assessments. There are 6 areas that we believe are essential to all instructional practices (Critical Thinking, Rigor, Inference, Academic Vocabulary, Goal Setting, and Questioning and Discussion Techniques). The common area in all subject areas relates to strengthening students reading and writing. Children are guided and supported to fulfill their creative, physical, emotional, social an d intellectual potential. Our goal is for our children to recognize that they have the power and resources to effect change and expect them to grow to be responsible, critical and caring members of a pluralistic society. We design instruction based on our integrated Social Studies curriculum with a strong focus on diversity and social justice. Each January, we celebrate the vision and dream of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. with an all school concert that reaffirms our hope for a just and peaceful world. Teachers work with the students to develop class performances and every child has the opportunity to be a part of the presentation. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a Pre-K through Grade 5 community school with the mission of bringing together diverse group of students to educate them academically, socially, emotionally and physically. Built in 1928 the school has become a center piece to a growing and changing community. The Edward K. Ellington School is named after Duke Ellington, the acclaimed Jazz legend. Since the school is named after Duke Ellington, there is a strong commitment to the Arts. All students in grades Pre-K through Grade 5 take classes in music, art, technology, media, science, physical education, and STEAM. In 2017, our school was rewarded with a 2.5 million dollar grant that will support the development of the Arts, Technology, and Science in our building. Marquis Studios generously provides a grant to support additional Arts and after-school programs that teach students Japanese drumming, photography, and other culturally relevent art-based initiatives. Renaissance Education is a consultant group that teaches students how to play musical instruments like the guitar, the drums, keyboard and dance. Students in grades 3-5 took the ELA, Math and Science State Assessments in 2018. PS 140 made significant growth on all assessments. Based on the State Assessment results in ELA our students increased by an incredible 32% . In Math our students increased by 13%. Last years growth represents 4 years of consecutive growth on both ELA and Math state assessment. In 2018, 95% of our 4th grade students who took the Science State Assessment received a level 3 or 4. Based on an analysis of our state assessment data along with multiple data sources starting in September 2018 we created our instructional focus. We have created this focus in collaboration with our staff through the work of our grade teacher teams, Vertical Teams, and SLT. We created an acronym so that it is easy for all to remember: MS GPS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  M - Model Critical Thinking S - Student Conferencing G - Gradual Release Model P - Purposeful Questions and Discussion Techniques S - SOLVE & Thinking Maps 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 140 has a targeted focus on specific sub groups that guide our work within the building. Our ENL students, SWD students and our Black and Hispanic students each determine the specificity of our support. In the last 3 years we hired a full time ENL teacher in preparation of the demographic shift occurring in our community. We provide specialized morning and afternoon academic support for all ENL and SWD students that address their academic deficiencies. For K-2 ENL students we utilize Sound Sensible as a support and iLit for all 3-5 students. We also purchased laptops for all ENL and SWD students. Students use technology to strengthen their reading comprehension. Students utilize computer-based programs MyOn and IXL for additional support in reading and math. Our SWD students are exposed to the Common Core standards through intensive academic rigor and support. Our SWD students are monitored for academic growth and social-emotional growth. We have partnered with Bright Future to provide additional support to students with disabilities. When planning for instruction, the Special Ed teacher meets with their regular ed colleagues to ensure that SWD students are challenged while supported with instructional scaffolds. For all SWD students, teachers and support staff regularly monitor students IEP goals and make adjustments with parental consent and input when needed. All of our sub groups are monitored via our Data Tracker with Data Corp. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Instructional Focus If teachers plan strategies that model for students how to make critical thinking visible when reading, writing, and solving word problems, then teachers will be able to progress monitor and reflect on student work products to determine if student growth is occurring and identify the appropriate areas for support in order to build student independence.  Citywide Instructional Pillars Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. At PS 140 we have developed an instructional focus that enables teachers and students to reflect on their practice and to monitor student growth. Our Units of Study, Lesson Plans, and in class activities are all aligned to the Common Core State Standards to ensure that academic rigor and complexity are a natural part of teacher planning and student 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  execution. Throughout the school year we allocate funding so that teachers have ample time and support to unpack the standards and analyze interim data to drive their instruction based on student goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q140 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 473 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 48 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 13 24 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 84.4% % Reduced Lunch 6.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.2% 21.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.67 0% 28% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 24 90.0% 4.4% 17.1% 67.0% 4.9% 4.9% 4 0% 7.1 43.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Significant progress was made based on a comparison of the 2018 Beginning of Year BOY to the End of Year EOY(2017-2018) New York City Performance Task (MOSL). This writing assessment measured the growth our students attained within a 6 month time period. * 95% of K -5 class showed evidence of growth based on the End of Year assessment * K - 2 classes also took the Math MOSL and showed growth towards proficiency Below are areas of strength: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  * Based on the ELA MOSL, students were most proficient in Traits 4-7 * The average point growth from BOY to EOY was 13pts for all K-2 students The 2018 Learning Environment Survey revealed significance growth in the parent perception of the safety of the school and increased trust in the Principal and the staff. A specific focus on the NYC Performance Tasks and Writing Initiative was a huge contributor to our growth. Danielson’s components 1e Designing Coherent Instruction, 3B Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3C Student Engagement and 3D Assessment In Instruction serve as the foundation of instruction. Over 90% of the teachers selected of these Components during their Initial Planning Conference meeting. By conferring with teachers and their requests to learn more about how to use baseline and other data to plan and improve instruction will strengthen our ability to assist more students in succeeding (Increase growth percentile scores (and Teacher Effectiveness Data –MOTP Student Scores). When looking at the Areas for Improvement from the Quality Review and feedback contained from the Principal Performance Observations, it was mentioned that the school needs to continue to work to use on-going assessments, to adjust instructional decisions and provide clear next steps to students so students know the area(s) where they need to improve so it is more clearly and consistently evidenced across all classrooms. The school began to focus on this last year and is continuing to further build capacity by working with teachers in developing/refining rubrics that can better guide students in their own learning. Additionally, the teachers began work to learn about and make meaning of the reason why Academic and Personal Behaviors are essential to students being engaged in their own learning. These multiple sources of data (i.e. Advance Data, Surveys from Teachers, Student Achievement Data, etc.) provided valuable information that was critical in identifying key area(s) that need to be developed to further engage students in learning Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will model critical thinking utilizing the SOLVE method in Math, support targeted goal setting by conferencing with students, implement and execute the gradual release model that improves students ability to create and respond to purposeful questions when writing in ELA and strengthen student discussions in Math that are student led and foster student independence when responding to multi-step word problems; thus enabling 60 % of K-2 students and 50% of grades 3-5 students perform at or above grade level as measured by internal assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Allocate funding for the training of teachers in National Training Network (NTN), Accelerated Learning, Thinking Maps and Data Corporation. Students in Grades K-5 October 2018 Administer F&P baseline(K-5), Dolch Sight Word Analysis (K-2), Fundations BOY Assessment (K-2), KEMS pre Unit Assessment (3-5), GoMath Pre Unit Test (K-2), On Demand Writing Assessment (K-5). Based on an item and trend analysis teachers will create a instructional action plan for each student, class and grade targeting specific groups, including sub groups of students. Students in Grades K-5 October 2018 Set up Data Day for each grade so that data from the pre-assessments will inform the creation of upcoming Units of Study. Grades K-5 November 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Consultants: Tashawna Deshazior, Bebe Morrisey, Jillian Chaitum, AP's, Principal & Pupil Accounting Secretary Grade K -5 Classroom Teachers, Universal Literacy Coach AP's, Principal Pupil Accounting Secretary,ELA & Math Vertical Team Members, Grade Team Leaders, AP's, Principal Implement a progress monitoring system that tracks how students are performing based on their individual results from the pre-assessment. Grades K-5 October 2018 - May 2019 Grade Team Leaders, ULit Coach, AP's and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Learning Walks and Parent Workshops - Both will be used to engage parents in the rigorous instruction that is provided. Mathletics, I-ready and IXL will support parents with knowledge of the Common Core. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Specific noted funds (NYSTL) to purchase NYS Rally materials and Achieve 3000 to support delivery of CCLS standards established a common professional planning period for all elementary core teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. a. After observations and planning all Ineffective and Developing teachers will receive targeted support and be scheduled to work with Aussie rep, Staff Developer and administration as a means of addressing gaps in their planning systematically and in a focused manner so they are working towards their IPC goals; b. Teachers will be responsible for collaboratively developing, submitting and sharing coherent lesson plans aligned to 1e, 3b,3c,3d; c. Vertical and Grade Teacher Teams will demonstrate team protocols and practices to develop lesson plans and Units of Study aligned to CCLS, CIE and Danielson Framework. By February 2019, 20%of K-1 students will be at grade level measured by the Ready Gen Assessments; 18%of grades 2-5 students will meet 50% or more of the grade level standards as measured by the Rally exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. These activities will be measured by feedback, follow up, agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) is functional and implemented school-wide to address maladaptive behaviors with positive behavioral incentives. The STARS (Self-control, Trustworthiness, Accountability, Respect, and Service) acronym is used to reinforce and remind students of the behavioral expectations in various locations throughout the school building. STARS, specifically addresses behaviors in the following areas: Auditorium, Cafeteria, Stairwells, Classrooms, and Restrooms. STARS behavioral expectations are prominently posted in these areas. Entire classes earn certificates for rewards such as an educational theme movie in the auditorium or a period of enhanced social interaction with peers. Individual students earn Duke Dollars to spend in the Shooting Stars Gallery (PBIS store). Items available for purchase are: stationery items, small toys, novelty objects, and educational items. An average of 50 Duke Dollars will be earned per student by June 2018. PS 140 parents are informed on a consistent basis through the utilization of Skedula/Pupil Path, which is a pre-existing tool. A positive behavior anecdotal feature allows teachers/staff members to document positive behaviors observed during the 2018-2019 school year. During Back to School Night, parents will be introduced to all positive behavior support programs. Parents will be provided with Sanford Harmony Parents components to implement at home. Through the application of Therapeutic Crisis Interventions in Schools (TCIS), the Crisis Committee members will provide staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  with tools to support effective classroom management. Ongoing Professional Development will be provided to staff members as identified by Administration. Trainings will provide strategies for crisis de-escalation. A Ladder of Referral will be created and implemented in order for staff to address at-risk behaviors. Crisis Committee members will support and encourage the utilization of The Sanford Harmony Social-Emotional Learning Program as a part of the classroom routine. The Sanford Harmony Social-Emotional Learning Program provides relationship building strategies that foster stronger classroom communities by helping each child understand and appreciate the diversity in others. The program will continue throughout the 2017-2018 school year. Crisis Committee members will support classroom teachers to ensure consistent implementation. The first three weeks of school will be focused on rituals and routine to establish a strong foundation as a part of the school culture to address behavioral concerns. Anti-bullying and conflict resolution assemblies will be facilitated in October 2018 and February 2019 to incorporate the Respect for All theme throughout the school community. Students recite the “I AM A STAR” (the anti-bullying pledge) daily during the morning message. Students that lead the message receive a certificate following the announcement as a part of the incentive program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, and Social Worker work along with the Support Team to implement programs that reduce conflicts by 30% in OORS reports. PS 140 will continue to promote positive behavior by utilizing school-wide interventions. Progress will be monitored using Skedula, Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), and PBIS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will purchase additional PRIM and Behavior Intervention Manual books to provide teachers and staff with useful interventions for addressing student behavior All Teachers and Staff The school will implement monthly Power Brain themes as follow: September: Responsibility, October: Honesty, November: Gratitude, December: Kindness, January: Fairness, February: Respect, March: Empathy, April: Citizenship, May: Integrity, and June: Leadership School Community Quarterly assemblies will be held for student to address various themes and school wide behavioral expectations. School Community September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration and Support Staff Administration, Power Brain Mentors and Parent Coordinator Administration, PBIS Committee, Power Brain Mentors, and Support Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will implement monthly themes as follows: September: Responsibility, October: Honesty, November: Gratitude, December: Kindness, January: Fairness, February: Respect, March: Empathy, April: Citizenship, May: Integrity, June: Leadership. Themes will be supported through family calendars, parent workshops, the Sanford Harmony Classroom Lessons, and the Literacy Book of the Month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL FSF, Special Education Funds and Title III funds will be used to purchase materials and allocate per session for training of staff after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Crisis Team, School Safety Committee and PBIS Committee meetings on a monthly basis will address student’s social and emotional needs. Action Plans will be created as needed. These Committees will ensure that the school community are informed of the tools and strategies that will support the students’ well-being. Progress will be monitored by ORRS reporting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PS 140 will measure progress by attaining OORS records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The development of teacher teams throughout the building is a cornerstone of effective schools. Teacher teams must be structured and organized so that teachers reflect on their practice with their colleagues. Teacher Teams must develop a structure and a system for looking at student work products in order to identify a specific area of need and align the most effective high leverage practices to increase student achievement. (Strengths) Once Teacher Teams operate around a specific model, then teachers will ensure that their collective planning of lessons address the specific areas that students need support. Teacher Teams will utilize the ORID Protocol and the Harvard Protocol for Teacher Team Meetings. In addition, Teacher Teams will use State assessment results and internal assessments to target specific sub groups of students (Ex: Black /Latino Males or Lowest Third) in order to monitor the growth and progress of these students. (Strength) After reviewing 2018 Measure Of Student Learning (MOSL) data in Literacy and Mathematics (Strength), there is a need for vertically aligned instructional teams in our school to help close school wide achievement gaps(Challenge) and omit any redundancies. Vertical Teams will be able to meet twice per month to review data which will identify trends and develop a plan to address necessary concepts and skills that will support closing the achievement gap. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 – 100% of teachers will work collaboratively to have ELA/Math Unit plans that reflect specific strategies that are data driven to support diverse learners , as evidenced by the creation of 4 Unit plans. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teacher Teams will be provided with a 6-8 week Inquiry Cycle plan Teachers in Grades K -5 October 19, 2018 until November 30, 2018 Grade Leaders for Each Grade, Assistant Principals, Principal Vertical Teacher Teams will review data and identify school wide trends and come up with a plan to address the gaps in specific subject areas. Each grade Leader will receive targeted professional learning from Assistant Principals and Principal on the Inquiry Cycle which involves identifying a Teacher Team focus group and a focus skill Each team will determine a target population and a goal for the 6 week period. Teachers will use a Teaming Protocol in order to strengthen teacher reflection Each Vertical Team will develop a plan of action to address gaps on specific grade levels. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grade Teacher Team Leaders Teachers K - 5 October 19, 2018 until November 30, 2018 Grade Leaders for each Grade, Assistant Principals October 19, 2018– November 30, 2018 Grade Leaders for each Grade, Assistant Principals, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teacher leaders will receive a book entitled "The Daily Five" and will receive per session for additional time to plan and organize the support mechanisms for teacher development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019 Teacher Teams will have created 2 Units of Study that reflect the multiple entry points. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using data from the Teacher Teams and student work sample results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 140 represents a teaching staff of 37 instructional staff and several support staff. Administration has been strategic when organizing, planning and making educational decisions. One example would be that ALL teachers in ALL grades have common planning time 5 times per week. At least 1 period every day is allocated for the teachers to plan collaboratively. Our school wide goals are connected to our Instructional focus, however our overall work focuses around our POWER goals. We have also added four instructional foci which includes vocabulary, making inferences, interpreting complex text and identifying the main idea. (Continued Support) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  By June 2018, administration will support the implementation of multiple 6 week inquiry cycles with teacher teams. This is developed to strengthen teacher practices and improving student performance as measured by 25% increase of 1 performance level in teacher rating in component 3C. Timeline will be from September 2016 to June 2017 measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric in the Advance System. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Within the Inquiry Cycle, writing will be a major focus throughout the building. Teachers will implement a writing support model called Restate Answer Cite Cite and Explain (RACCE) in order to achieve rigorous CCLS writing goals. Teachers and Staff October 2016 to June 2017 Teachers and Administration Within the Inquiry Cycle, administration will monitor the implementation of an Independent reading focus to improve reading stamina and ability to enrich their mastery of complex text . Teachers and Staff Teachers will use MOSL Six Trait Writing rubric to measure student Progress. Teachers and Staff Teacher will analyze student work products and create a plan for improvement. Teachers and Staff October 2016 to June 2017 October 2016 to June 2017 Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration October 2016 to June 2017 Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ReadyGen and GoMath curriculum was purchased to support student learning along with Teacher Curriculum . Professional learning Opportunities during Monday PLC and entire days of dedicated Teacher Support, funded by the placement of Sub Teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every 6 weeks all Teacher Teams and Vertical Teams will participate in a inquiry cycle that involve monitoring Assessment, Analysis, Planning, Professional Development, Observation and Adjustment to the curriculum. 90% of Teams will submit minutes and surveys to monitor implementation and progress towards goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher created exams that assess standards in writing included on the MOSL measured by teacher professional impact towards progress will be assessed by using Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 140’s structures support and builds leadership and curriculum leadership across the school and uses these structures to strengthen relationships with our parents. (Strength) Parents are included as members of the School leadership Team helping to create the CEP which guides instruction of the building. Teacher Teams write and publish collaborative grade newsletters that are shared with parents and the community. The teacher team newsletters are posted on the school website for additional communication to the parents and school community. This improves communication and keeps all parents and the community informed so they are actively aware of the Common Core Learning Standards and the Citywide instructional expectations. (Strength) In addition we have multiple forms of communication. We provide a minimum of 6 ways to inform parents about activities occurring at the school. School Messenger, School website, monthly calendar, monthly Power Brain activity calendar, monthly grade specific newsletter, monthly schoolwide newsletter, Pupil Path, September Open House Event, Parent Learning Walks, Coffee with the Principal, Power Brain Parent Workshop, Teacher outreach via phone calls represent some of the ways PS 140 strengthens outreach to parents. (Continued Support) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 30% of parents will engage in school activities and workshops that promote parental education, academic performance on a monthly basis in an effort to promote community involvement and parental ties as measured by parent attendance. This will measured by parent attendance as evidenced in the sign in sheet and agendas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SLT created a sub- committee to further evaluate areas where parent perceptions scored lower on the Learning Environment Survey Increase communication by using Messenger, School website and Pupil path using explicated wording of you are invited to the following event, program performance , etc. All Parents All Parents December-January 2018 September 2017-June 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SLT Parent Sub-Committee Parent Coordinator Technology Coordinator Provide a series of parent workshops that are practical for parents to assist in preparing their children with college and career readiness. All Parents October 2017- May 2018 Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor Provide a beginning of the year Curriculum Night, plus monthly CCLS Workshops linked with the PTA meetings that actively engage parents in a real world CCLS task that teachers do with students in their classrooms. All Teachers September 2017- through June 2018 Parent Coordinator, All Staff and Parent Teacher Association 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Parent Sub-Committee from SLT , Per Session or Meal to compensate teachers for planning and delivery of workshops to parents, Funds to purchase Subscription to Survey Monkey , Funds for Phone Messenger, Skedula/Pupil Path, Funds to Website Hosting Services that provides, on-line a access, texts, and emails. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, at least 18% or more of parents have attended the workshops and school activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fundations, Fountas and Pinnell, I-Ready Assessment, State Assessments Ready Assessment, State Assessments, GoMath Baseline and Item Skills Analysis Baseline Assessment for Grade 4 - K-3 and Grade 5 Unit of Study Exam Fundations, Fountas and Pinnellresults, I-ready assessment and Content Area Exams. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small Group and Individual Pulls out small groups for conflict resolution. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Re-teaching, Phonics and Targeted Reading Strategies Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group - Push In and Pull Out Duringregular school hours Small Group – Push in and Pull Out Duringregular school hours Hands on instruction and reinforcement weekly. Extensive professional development for grade 3-5 teachers to focus on strategies for small group instruction Hands on instruction and reinforcement weekly. During the school day & Fridays 2:30 -4:00pm During regular school hours Provides one on one or small group During regular school hours Review foundational mathematical conceptual knowledge Differentiated instruction by the Science cluster teacher and classroom teachers during the regular day. Differentiated instruction by the classroom teacher. Classroom-Initiated Projects on Social Studies Intervention provided to students focusing on social and coping skills, feelings, character education and career awareness. Guidance is trained in Peer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Mediation and Conflict Resolution. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently ten students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing are offered programs such as assistance through the Academic Intervention Services, extended day programs and Back pack/School supply program. A toy drive, food drive and Holiday appreciotion program is condcuted. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 Students in Temporary Housing are offered programs such as assistance through the Academic Intervention Services, extended day programs and Back pack/School supply program. A toy drive, food drive and Holiday appreciotion program is condcuted. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3000 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 140 adopts a comprehensive system for training and hiring new staff. Resumes from college students majoring in Education are reviewed and filed. Positions are also posted on the Open Market, and a Hiring Committee is formed and staffed on a voluntary basis. When a vacancy for a position is expected, Hiring Committee meetings take place after school or during the summer vacation. Resumes, interview questions, sample answers, and interview procedures are created and/or reviewed at these meetings. A written response to an essay question, an interview, and a model lesson are part of the interview process. When possible, a model lesson is conducted by the person being interviewed. Consensus must be reached by committee members before a candidate is chosen to fill a position. Upon being hired, new teachers participate in a new teacher group that meets one morning per week in order to provide support and guidance. All new teachers participate in the teacher-selected, and teacher-guided, professional learning experiences at least once per week. New Teachers are partnered or “buddied” with a highly effective-or-effective-rated veteran teacher to give grade specific guidance and training about curriculum, classroom management, and best teaching practices. Inter-visitations are arranged through the administrative staff. New teachers are also explicitly trained in understanding and using the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric in order to improve their teaching practices. New teachers are encouraged to continue their professional growth by participating in outside organizations/events such as college or UFT classes, museum workshops, trips, the Teachers-Pay-Teachers website, etc. Our Professional Learning program to support the new teachers is outlined as follows: All new teachers are assigned to a Vertical Team, which meets once per week on Monday after school. In these Vertical teams, teacher representatives from each grade from Kindergarten through Grade Five meet to look at students work, analyze data, and plan professional development around a particular curricular area. These four areas are as follows: Literacy, Math, Response to Intervention (Meeting the needs of Special Needs students), and Data Analysis. The teacher gets to choose his/her specialty, and contributes to the meetings, as well as bringing back professional development plans for his/her grades. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Teachers plan professional development experiences for their grade level colleagues. For example, a Grade Four Math specialist will gain Professional Development ideas from the Vertical Team meetings, and then plan an experience for his Fourth Grade colleagues, to be presented during weekly grade professional development meetings. Throughout the school year, each teacher will have the opportunity to lead professional development four times per year. Each teacher also benefits from professional development experiences provided by colleagues Our Cabinet/Professional Development team meets once per week to analyze data and make decisions about a Professional Learning Calendar, curriculum planning opportunities, and additional professional development opportunities, as the needs arise. Inter-visitation to colleagues, on the same and different grades, are encouraged. It is expected that a new teacher will participate in at least four visits to another teacher’s classroom per year. New Teacher participate in teacher surveys where they may have further voice in influencing decisions regarding Professional Development topics and planning. . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to enable students to meet the demand of more rigorous Common Core State Standards, our staff has to be well-versed in those standards and the strategies needed to help students meet them. Towards that end, maintaining the quality of our school’s professional development program is a strong priority at P.S. 140Q. We place an emphasis on planning and preparation being collaborative, and our professional development that supports this is collaborative also. No teacher, or other staff member, works in a vacuum; we are all responsible for the success of all. All teachers participate in the following “Teacher Teams”: Weekly Vertical Team meetings, weekly grade-level professional development meetings, weekly Data review meetings, and weekly Inquiry meetings. These are in addition to daily preparation periods that are shared with colleagues on their grades, in order to share grade-specific Professional Learning experiences, as well as collaborative planning. Vertical teams meet after school for 40 minutes once per week, around Literacy, Math, RTI, and Data. One teacher from each grade represents his/her grade at these meetings. Standards are unpacked, and the various challenges of meeting similar standards across grades are shared, compared, and analyzed. Student work and other data are analyzed in order to notice trends upon which to based future professional development. Teachers on the vertical team turn-key information back to their grades. All teachers are individually responsible for presenting to their colleagues during a four to six-week cycle of professional learning experiences. Members of the School’s Professional Development Team; consisting of supervisors, representatives from each grade, and “specialists” such as our Science Teacher and SETSS Teacher cycle in to the teacher-directed Professional Development, as needed, to offer professional learning on new curricula, new DOE mandates, etc. Analysis of teacher surveys and, data from ADVANCE by the instructional cabinet, offers insights into possible new opportunities for professional learning. The Cabinet and Professional Development Team are responsible for ensuring that curricular calendars, Professional Development plans and schedules, and scope and sequences of the various curricula are followed. The Principal’s Cabinet meets once per week to analyze data within and across grades, in different curricular areas, in order to update and adjust professional learning activities. The school wide professional development team meets once per month to look at student work across grades, and to allow for input from all teacher representatives. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  ORID protocol is used, where staff members look at student work samples and are “Objective, reflective, interpretive, and decisional” in making next steps to plan and implement instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K teachers are invited to professional learning experiences, during Chancellor’s conference days, to learn the academic expectations for Kindergarten. In addition, they attend all PD provided by the Department of Education (DOE), and the networks related to having high expectations for Kindergarten students. They also participate in the Kindergarten Inquiry Team meetings, where info is shared regarding the processes involved in meeting the needs of Kindergarten students. Parents of Pre-K students attend workshops given by the Parent Coordinator to prepare them to help their children get ready for Kindergarten. Books and other materials are distributed to the Pre-K parents at “moving up” time, so that they may work with their children over the summer prior to starting Kindergarten. In addition, Pre-K has implemented the Pearson “Work Sampling” program, to ensure that teachers, parents, and students are connected and aware of standards-based skills requirements and progress, via a web-based program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Pre-K teachers are invited to professional learning experiences, during Chancellor’s conference days, to learn the academic expectations for Kindergarten. In addition, they attend all PD provided by the Department of Education (DOE), and the networks related to having high expectations for Kindergarten students. They also participate in the Kindergarten Inquiry Team meetings, where info is shared regarding the processes involved in meeting the needs of Kindergarten students. Parents of Pre-K students attend workshops given by the Parent Coordinator to prepare them to help their children get ready for Kindergarten. Books and other materials are distributed to the Pre-K parents at “moving up” time, so that they may work with their children over the summer prior to starting Kindergarten. In addition, Pre-K has implemented the Pearson “Work Sampling” program, to ensure that teachers, parents, and students are connected and aware of standards-based skills requirements and progress, via a web-based program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 300,674.00 121,719.00 0 0 2,583,862.00 Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 140Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [PS 140Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  PS 140Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The program we currently have in the school provides specific instruction that is aligned to data analysis from prior interim exams, diagnostic exams, reading baseline assessments that focus on skills and strategies that will enable the English Native Learner to improve their achievement levels as measured by the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA and Math examination. The six teachers who service the ENL population in our school will be provided with regular ENL Teacher team meetings where they will learn a strategy to implement into their classrooms. The teacher team meetings last for 45 mins and occur when the grade bands have a prep. Every eight weeks the teachers will receive a new strategy. They will be able to test the students to see if students have learned the strategy and are able to implement it. We will also use test preparation materials to (1) address our school instructional focus, inference, vocabulary, and close reading strategies. (2) Allow students to become familiar with the NYS ELA and Mathematics examination as well as the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Subgroups and grade level: Pull-out grade band: Kindergarten and 2nd grade; Pull-out grade band: 3rd, 4th and 5th grade. Push-in: Kindergarten, 1st grade, 2nd grade, 3rd grade, 4th grade, 5th grade. Schedule and duration: Entering, and Emerging students gets 4 periods of push-in and 4 periods of pull-out. Students who are Transitioning and Expanding students get 4 periods of push-in a week. Commanding students get 2 periods of push-in services a week. Students who need to learn to read will receive small group instruction through the Wilson Language Training for an additional 2 days a week before school from 7:00 am to 8:00 am. Language of instruction: English # and types of certified teachers: 1 ENL Teacher, 6 teachers who have ENL students in their room. Types of Materials: iLit Literacy Program, Achieve 3000, ENL textbooks and materials, IXL, RTI and other extra help services. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: In order to strengthen the skills of our ENL teacher, she attends workshops in school on a district level and receives one on one trainings from webinars and our school based consultant. The teacher also attends monthly meetings outside of school in order to learn advanced strategies to bring to our school staff. Several teachers who service the ELLs are also sent to professional learning workshops in order to better help their students when in the Gen-ed setting. She, as well as the other teachers then turnkey the information to all teachers. Our teachers also attend professional development every Monday on topics such as: Differentiated Instruction, Vocabulary Acquisition, Using text features to comprehend, Making Inferences, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and Goal setting. We hold our PD's on Mondays from 2:50 pm to 4 pm. At this time, we discuss and learn how to better assist all our students with a special emphasis on the ENL and SWD students. Tuesdays, we have parent engagement time from 2:40 pm to 3:30 pm. Teachers take this time to meet with parents to discuss how their children are doing in class. From 3:30 pm to 3:55 pm we either have other professional training sessions, teacher teams or general meetings. We also use this time to have parent based events. Ms. Ghevarghese (our ENL teacher) also receives Field Support based training to better serve her students. She will also attend all day borough based training when they are available. The topics that will be covered are Vocabulary Acquisition, ENL strategies, new ENL information, Policy Information and Compliance. Other seminars may include using text features to comprehend writing across the curriculum. The person(s) that are responsible for this professional development are: Assistant Principals, coaches, borough officers of ENL, and school based consultants. Impact on Ells: These PDs positively impact the progress of Ells by allowing teachers to learn how to better serve them. Many teachers are at a loss when it comes to helping entering and emerging Ells students who may not be able to speak, read and write in English. These PDs help teachers learn strategies as well as activities that they could do as a whole group or with just the Ells. The speaking and exploring activities that we learn at the many PDs that we attend not only allow Ells to verbalize their thoughts but also allows Gen-Ed kids to do the same. Furthermore, these PDs allow teachers to feel supported. As a result, we have seen a growth in the students and their process can be seen in last year's NYSESLAT scores. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Here at P.S 140 we believe that the best way to get students interested or engaged in education is through their parents. If the parents are interested in education for themselves, then they will be more involved in their children's education and be actively able to help them. In order for this to happen, we have started a school wide survey in which parents will be able to tell what kind of programs they are interested in having: ENL or GED. We have reached out to parents through fliers, phone blasts and Skedula. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Once the surveys are done, we will be able to open a class at theschool through the OACE: The Office of Adult and Continuing Education. We hope to start this program up again in the 2018 - 2019 school year. We do this through a verity of fun activities for parents such as: Art With Parents, Cooking with Parents, Informational Technology Workshop, Move to Improve, Valentine's Day Madness and Parents Day Workshop. We also have school wide MAGNET incentives such as Project Based Learning and Science Fair every year. Schedule and Duration: We have also put activities in place that will bring parents to events throughout the building. Before school, during school hours, Saturday and after school parent engagement sessions invite parents into given workshops to expose and teach them about different strategies and skills that will enable them to assist their children. Not only will these strategies help students improve their homework and class-work, but also state-wide examinations January 2018 through June 2019. Some of the topics covered will include: homework without tears, MyOn, Mathematics, reading comprehension activities, Vocabulary and Go Math in the home. The Assistant Principal for ENLs, Instructional coaches, borough-wide ENL leaders, and the ENL teacher will be responsible for providing the parental workshops to reinforce and strengthen these skills. Activity: All activities happen on Tuesdays from 2: 45 - 3:45 pm 1. Informational Technology Workshop: Oct 23, 20182. Adult Education Orientation: November 13, 20183. Cooking with Parents: December 18, 20184. Kick Start Fitness: January 22, 20185. Valentine's Day Madness: February 12, 20186. Parents' Day Workshop: May 7th, 2018 Fliers and Messaging Services: Fliers are given out for all events that we host. Most in-house fliers are translated to Spanish, Arabic and Bengali using the BigIdea and Over-The-Phone Interpretation service is used by every staff member in our building to contact parents who speak other languages. Outreach is also made through our school website which auto-translates from English to Spanish. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL ____________ _______ ________ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Edward Kennedy Ellington Borough Queens School Number 140 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal David Norment Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sherin Ghevarghese Teacher/Subject Area Sherin Ghevarghese /ENL Teache Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Lisa Pena Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Eartha Pruitt & Robbyn Hasberr Coach N/A School Counselor Rosemary Fabre Parent Derrick Hall Parent Coordinator Beverly Baptiste Field Support Center Staff Member Nilda Kraft Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 453 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 Lang. K 1 4 2016-17 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school currently uses the Fountas & Pinnell Assessment tool to assess early literacy skills of our ELL students. The F&P assessment allows us to analyze our student’s fluency rate as well as the student’s phonemic awareness. The F&P Assessment is also used to determine independent and instructional reading levels and for placing students on the F&P A-Z text gradient. The test is given three times per year to measure whether or not the students are meeting grade specific benchmarks. Progress monitoring is done on a monthly basis and is used to drive instruction, to help our ELL students make progress. In addition to F&P Assessment, our schools also utilize Fundations as an early intervention tool to assess the phonics and literacy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  skills of our ELL population. The teacher also gives students a Best Plus test which purely assesses language. This test is re-administered after six weeks to see improvement in a student's speech. All entering students would have been administered the NYSITELL upon arrival. This is in addition to teacher-created assessments, chapter assessments and multiple beginning, mid and end assessments. The ENL teacher also administers phonics, literacy and comprehension based tests to create goals for her students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data is collected as a school in October and this is used as a baseline for their reading. This assessment is given three times a year to account for their beginning, mid and end performance. The F & P scores allow us to make MyOn and iReady available to them so that they could increase their reading levels. If a student is reading on an A or B level, MyOn assigns books that are on their level or higher to slowly increase their reading levels. iReady auto-adjusts based on the needs of the students. If a student has a particular deficiency, that's what iReady targets and works on. We have added additional lessons on iReady for students that are specifically geared for ells to acquire language and phonics. Students also receive a red folder which documents how much they have read per night. The parents must sign off on the reading every night and students are also required to write a response based on the reading. The assignment changes every night. This is on top of the reading assigned by the teachers on a daily basis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate our English Language Learners, we use multiple forms of assessment (Formative Assessments, Summative Assessments, State-wide Examinations, and Periodic Assessments): Fountas & Pinnell, and State English Language Arts Exam, NYSESLAT, and, NYSITELL as well as the NYS Progress Report. We gather the data to determine if our program is effective. We also give internal weekly assessments to progress monitor the success of our ELLS. The classroom teacher and the ENL Instructor work together to create a program which target the child's deficiencies. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is collected, the deficiencies are then addressed in the upcoming units. The pace is different in an ENL classroom vs the General-Ed classrooms. The ENL teacher focuses on skills either missed in the previous chapters or the ones students will encounter in the upcoming chapters. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use a variety of Formative and Summative Assessments to help us monitor our English Language Learners. In the classroom the ELL teacher uses both verbal and written means to checks for understanding to monitor the Ell students during classroom instruction. If the Ell teacher notices that the student(s) is not getting the skill and/ strategy the instruction is shifted to help that student during Tier I. If the student continues to struggle, the teacher provides small group instruction with the ELL students in a small group that targets different skills and strategies in Tier I. This small group takes place in the classroom when the teacher pushes in. After carefully monitoring the student through conferencing and assessments, the teacher continues to "Check for the students' understanding", the ELL teacher moves the student to TIER III instruction. Tier III instruction takes place out of the classroom and requires to be serviced by the teacher during pull out. Tier III intervention starts when the ELL teacher utilizes assessments and diagnoses whether the student needs additional academic/language support. The students in Tier III are pulled out and the ELL Teacher uses I-Ready and to gather data and inform instruction for the Tier III student. The ENL teacher provides the Tier III with 45 minutes of additional services per week. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the 2016 - 2017 NYSITELL reveals that the students on each grade level (3 EN), and (5 Ex) as compared to the NYSESLAT (3 EM), (3 TR) and (3 CM) are making gains in English Language Acquisition . The students are showing higher levels of proficiency across the grade levels as they gain more exposure to the language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When information is received, the classroom teacher is made aware of all the information. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher then take the appropriate steps to help the students in the Gen-ed class as well as the ENL classroom. All parent teacher meetings are done together so that next steps could be taken. Both the Gen-Ed and the ENL teacher monitor the students' progress. Monitoring is done through class tests and quizzes. Students are given a pre-post test for every unit. If students are struggling with a particular concept, it is revisited in small group and during pull-out. The end of unit assessments (which occur every 6 weeks) determine if students have mastered the concept or not. The topic is readdressed in a different way in the new unit. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. This year 2016-2017 our Ells program is delivered through a combination of the pull out / push in model. The Students are placed heterogeneously mixed proficiency levels. The class travel in a group. The ENL students are grouped within the classroom and the ENL Teacher provides the group with Tier I and Tier II instruction. At times students are also grouped homogeneously accordingly to their levels. Students who are still learning how to read as grouped as a whole so that they could receive target Fundational skills, phonics and learn how to blend. The students who can read, but lack comprehension are placed in a group so that they could strengthen those skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our staff ensures that the students are receiving the mandated amount of instruction in the following ways: our state-licensed ENL teacher pushes into classrooms to provide them with instruction; the students that are on the beginning level and intermediate level receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. The students that are functioning on the advanced level receive 180 minutes of instruction of ELA as per CR Part 154. Students who require 360 minutes are pulled out 4 times a week. Students in the lower grades are pulled out 1st period and students in the upper grades are pulled out 8th period. The teacher also pushes in to respective classrooms 4 times a week. When the teacher pushes in, she services all the ENL students in each respective grades which includes; new, expanding, long term and former Ells. The minutes are monitored by the Gen-Ed teacher as well as the ENL teacher. Extra tutoring is provided outside of the allotted time if needed. She would pull students during prep or with other groups to provide extra help for several 45 minute periods a week. The Gen-ed teacher also provides RTI along with the ENL teacher during DEAR time which is 1st period of every day and in small groups during the day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The school ensures that the ELLs are receiving instruction that is age and grade appropriate by ensuring that teachers create standard based units of study with the multiple entry points for the English Language Learners. Teachers are also required to create daily lessons with entry points for Ells. The teachers are to check for students understanding and shift the instruction to meet the students’ needs. Our ENL teacher use research-based instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to enrich student language development. She integrates Common Core Learning Standards with the content area instruction into their teaching. There is a focus on content vocabulary, differentiated instruction and scaffolding. Our ENL teacher confers with the classroom teachers as well, and the IEP teacher to set goal for individual students and for teachers to plan for differentiated instruction to help students improve their Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing skills .The teacher chooses one or more strategies and the instructional focus for the week in writing and reading comprehension to help the ELLs meet the CCLs on their grade level .The teacher supports content vocabulary by adopting a word of the week and the idiom of the week, along with various skills for the ELLs. Teachers provide scaffolded instruction for the different units in ReadyGen, and Go Math. In addition, pertinent thematic units are taught. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In Mathematics, the students whose home language is Spanish are tested in Spanish. ReadyGen also has materials in Spanish so that they could keep pace with the rest of the students. Materials used to support English Language Learners found eligible for English language services and whose home language is Spanish, we administer Spanish NYSITELL to identify their native language skills. For students with special needs and for students who speak a language other than Spanish, bilingual specialists assess students' native language skills using appropriate language instruments. Ells who speak various languages are assisted by teachers and paras who speak their native languages. The ENL teacher uses their assistance for periodic assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The schools ensures that the ELLs are receiving instruction that is age and grade appropriate by ensuring that teachers create standard based units of study with the multiple entry points for the English Language Learners. Teachers are also required to create daily lessons that with entry points for Ells. The teachers are to check for students understanding and shift the instruction to meet the students’ needs. Teachers will use scaffolds, and strategies as well as the instructional focus, writing and reading comprehension to help the ELLs meets the CCLs on their grade levels. SIFE students are placed in age-appropriate classrooms. We try to pair the SIFE with a peer who speaks his/her language. The materials provided to the child is similar in content to the work other students are working on, but the level is vastly lowered so that the student would be able to keep abreast with the curriculum. a. The SIFE are given an equal access to participation all student activities and receive Title lll and AIS services, as well as the support of the Guidance Counselor and bilingual social worker. We give students intensive instruction in building literacy skills and vocabulary development in a small group setting. b. Newcomer students are provided with I Ready, picture dictionaries, educational games, language Tutor, visuals, manipulatives, picture books and tapes. c. Developing, Long Term and Former Ells are on a targeted plan which focuses on what the students are lacking based on their NYSESLAT and summative assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Differentiated Instruction is provided to all ELLS. We distribute to students, available bilingual glossaries in Content Areas and make sure the child has a dictionary in his/her home language with them during and after schools hours. We closely monitor their progress both in English language acquisition and in the Content Areas through formal and informal assessment, conference notes and conversations. We also reach out to parents to consolidate Home and School connection. Our parent Coordinator, Beverly Baptiste, helps find parents speaking the same language. We also have support staff that speak the same language as our Ells which helps in the translation process. They assist the teacher translate materials into the students' native languages. This material is also sent home to parents so that they can practice with their children. Parents are also provided translated versions of the information sent out to parents. Parents are invited to enroll in the Adult ENL Class of our local library. We are also looking into starting an adult education classes for parents at our school to ensure that children and parents alike know the value of education. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The materials used to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities are Dictionaries and Thesauruses in various languages, charts, songs, picture mosaics, educational games, sentence starters and stems. For Math instruction teachers use manipulates, graphic organizers, and strategies.The technology that is used to support English Language Learners are Promethean boards, desk tops and laptops. Students have access to Brainpop ESL, Brainpop, specialized lessons on iReady as well as websites geared to educational games and activities for Ells. The teachers utilize graphic organizers and word walls to help with English language development academic vocabulary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teacher's develop lesson plans and instructional units that are aligned to the the IEP goals and CCLS. Teachers use scaffolds and a variety of strategies to help the students meet their IEP goals, ELL goals and attain proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Teachers meet together on a daily basis during Teacher Team Meetings to analyze student work and provide ENL and SWD's with additional strategies and support such as lessons that involve multi-sensory, flexible grouping, differentiated work and manipulates for math. We also have monthly ENL meetings to discuss upcoming events and ways to assist our students. Parents are invited to the meetings to share their input. The teacher also turnkeys info learned in Professional Developments. The information is shared with the IEP teacher, the pupil secretary, the AP, Gen-ed teachers and the parent coordinator. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program for Ells are as follows: The English Language learner instructor will push into the classroom and provide students with six weeks of Tier 2 to both entering and emerging students. The Ell Teacher will monitor the student’s growth by first giving a baseline assessment and in six weeks giving another assessment. If the student has made progress, the student will remain in the same small group until they show growth. This will serve as a baseline for instruction and the teacher will be able to monitor the students' growth. After school programs are also provided to students who are struggling and have scored a 2 or lower on the state test. This includes ENL students who did not take the test or need additional help. The lessons are targeted and break down the content so it is easy for the students to understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Through the administration of the NYSITELL and other assessment exams, we will be monitoring the growth and development of our ELLs in reading and writing. We already have systems in place such as using R.A.C.E, accountable talks, checklists, rubrics, and criteria for success which students must use school wide. This way, they become accustomed to structure and are able to use these practices every year. We will be implementing more strategies for answering word problems, reading comprehension, writing non -fiction pieces and vocabulary acquisition such as accountable questioning. This will be done through advice given to teachers through the school newsletter. The teacher will also have ENL related meetings with the classroom teachers that service the Ells. During these meetings we discuss if the programs and strategies we have implemented have worked, how we could modify the strategies if needed and how to bring rigor into everything that we teach. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our Ells have access to the after-school programs. Students are given a consent form, and parent must return the form signed giving the student’s permission to join. Once the forms are collected, Ells may attend the program. The programs are constructed based on the level of need. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The materials used to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities are Dictionaries and Thesauruses in various languages, charts, songs, educational games, picture mosaics, sentence starters and stems. For Math instruction teachers use manipulates, graphic organizers, and strategies.The technology that is used to support English Language Learners are Promethean boards, desk tops and laptops. Students have access to Brainpop ESL, Brainpop, specialized lessons on iReady as well as websites geared to educational games and activities for Ells. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language support is delivered in content. Teachers allow students to pick books that are centered on the students’ culture. The teacher asks the students specific questions that allow the students an opportunity to discuss their culture while learning about other cultures. The teacher also brings in songs and literature which feature language, music and festivals represented in other cultures. This helps enhance student interest and helps students learn tolerance. Parents are invited to classrooms to provide suggestions and to share their culture. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The schools ensures that the ELLs are receiving instruction that is age and grade appropriate by ensuring that teachers create standard based units of study with the multiple entry points for the English Language Learners. Teachers are also required to create daily lessons that with entry points for Ells. The teachers are to check for students understanding and shift the instruction to meet the students’ needs. Teachers will use scaffolds, and strategies as well as the instructional focus, writing and reading comprehension to help the ELLs meets the CCLs on their grade level. Different assessments are created for gen-ed students and ells based on their level and ability. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  During the summer, a suggested list of books , is mailed home for students to read over the summer. The teacher mails the lists. Students in grade pre-k through two, receive a Dolch reading list to practice sight words. Depending on the language proficiency of the parent, the sight word list is also translated into the language of choice as for the parent to better comprehend the words that they are teaching their children. Parents are also sent a monthly newsletter to inform parents of upcoming events and instructions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are currently no ENL electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not offer a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All personnel on the ELL Committee receive professional development on several levels.; school level, District Level and from a consultant. Every Monday, the constituents on the Ell Committee receive adequate professional development in areas that will help them instruct their students in the Common Core Learning Standards. The primary focus of our PDs are to help students who are struggling and scoring low, to improve and for students who are doing well to maintain their high scores. Our Ells generally fall into that criteria. The teachers also receive professional development in good pedagogy as per Danielson Framework. Furthermore, teachers also meet in grade level teacher teams to learn strategies for instruction. There are several professional development sessions that are focused on helping the English Language Learners meet the CCLs. We build units of study that are standard based; Rich discussions in the Classroom, Assessing Student Learning, and Scaffolding Instruction. Teachers receive professional development on an on-going basis. As data is reviewed, administrators schedule teachers for adequate Professional Development sessions to help teachers of ELLs improve instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Currently we do not have a Bilingual /Dual Language Program in our school. In order to keep our teachers abreast of trends in education English Language Learners, and to meet the 50% hourly goals of professional development of Teachers of English Language Learners, our English Language Learner Teachers are sent to Professional Development sessions outside of the building two or three times a month. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept in our ELL binder. We have an ENL binder that consists of every single document we have worked on this year. Information is also sent home through Skedula and a phone blast. This information is turn keyed to the rest of the teachers during Monday PD Sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Monday PDs are also held every week; many of the PDs focus on how to assist low performing students (which includes Ells and SWDs) . Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to provide parents with an annual individual meeting to discuss their child’s progress and next steps for the child, parents are called in once a year by our Parent Coordinator, Beverly Baptiste. After the parent has scheduled an appointment, the name of the parent is placed on a calendar. The parent meets with the ELL Committee to discuss the progress that the student has made/ and or the lack thereof. The assessments that inform the instruction are there for the parents to review. The teacher that services that child is present at the meeting. If the parent is in need of an interpreter, the school will ensure that the parent has on before the meeting. Next steps and goals are reviewed, and revised with input from the parent, and the ENL cycle continues. The ENL teacher speaks to the parents on an ongoing basis and follows up with teachers and parents regarding any issues. Meetings are held with the parents and the ENL teacher at least twice a month and correspondence is made with them on a regular basis. Any and all contacts are recorded through Skedula which parents have access to. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of Ells are invited in on a monthly basis to participate in strategies and to inform the parents on things they could do to help their child improve in school. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept in the ELL Binder along with anything else pertaining to the Ells. Parents are also encouraged to volunteer in our school. Our Parent Coordinator Ms. Beverly Baptiste provides a time for Parents to meet Personnel from School Based Organization that can assist ELL Parents, and or provide the parents with information to help their students improve (Home School Connections). Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. This survey is a live document and will be updated three times per year, in order to update ELL information (as needed). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, David Norment, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Edward Kennedy Ellington School DBN: 28Q140 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) David Norment Title Principal Eartha Pruitt Assistant Principal Beverly Baptiste Parent Coordinator Sherin Ghevarghese ENL/Bilingual Teacher Derrick Hall Lisa Pena NA NA NA Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rosemay Fabre School Counselor Mabel Sarduy NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 NA NA NA 06/27/17 06/27/17 NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q140 School Name: Edward K.Ellington School Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Eartha Sherin Pruitt Assistant Principal Ghevarghese ENL Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents that are registering students for the first time in the New York City Public School System are given a Home Language Identification Survey . After the completion of the HLIS, the parent is interviewed by the ENL teacher or another one of the trained pedagogue (if she is not present) and given an informal interview. During the interview process, the parent is asked what language he/she prefers to receive information. If an interpreter is needed to translate during this process, the In-House translator will communicate this process.The parent also chooses the preferred language on the Emergency Card. The preferred language is then coded in ATS for both child and parent. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral According to the HLIS Forms the preferred languages for our parental community is as follows: Afrikaans Arabic Bengali Chinese French Haitian Creole English Spanish NA NA NA Afrikaans Arabic Bengali Chinese French Haitian Creole English Spanish NA NA NA 0.2 0.78 0.59 0.59 0.2 0.2 91.37 6.08 NA NA NA 1 4 4 3 1 1 464 32 NA NA NA 0.2 0.78 0.78 0.59 0.2 0.2 90.98 6.27 NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September 2016 October 2016 November 2016 December 2016 January 2017 February 2017 March 2017 April 2017 May 2017 June 2017 Sept 2017 School Newsletter - The school newsletter is distributed every month. This newsletter can be in both Spanish and English by a school based translator. New York State Testing Dates - The New York State Testing Dates will be downloaded from the DOE Website in Spanish and English Grade Newsletter - This newsletter will be sent home by the teacher. It can be translated by an In-House Personnel. Report Cards - Report cards will be sent home in both English, and Spanish. Translation may also be available for Urdu and Arabic. It will be translated via the STARS system. All other communications from school like notices to parent will be sent home in both English and their native language. The notices will be translated by an In-House Personnel. If the school personnel is not able to translate, the district representative will translate notices for the school. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All of our newsletters are on our school website, our school website has a translation function that allows our parents to translate all of the contents and information into their own language. If we are unable to translate documents in-house, then we would utilize the translation unit for assistance. If there are languages that are indigenous then we will reach out to community groups that are fluent in that particular indigenous language along with parents who speak the same language. In the up-coming school year, we will use Language Line when there is a language that we cannot translate for in-house. We will also begin using the DOE Vendor: The Big Word for any quick notices which require a very short turn-around or contains student-specific content. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open House September 2017 through June 2018 interpretation service(s)? Coordinate through the use of Translation budgetary funding to arrange interpreters to be present at 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Every Tuesday - Parent Engagement Parent Teacher Conferences Orientation ELL 1:1 Meetings meetings based on those who confirm their attendance. We will insure that we use the parent buddy system to ensure that all the needed languages are covered. If there is a language that is not covered, we will use a variety of different sources such as committees and church organizations with different indigenous languages. NA Na Na Na Na Na Na Na Na 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use Pupilpath, school website and school messenger to communicate to parents on a regular basis. These tools would be used in an event of an emergency. Regular school-wide phone calls are made if there is information that all parents need to be aware of. We do it early enough in order to make sure that parents could call back and get assistance in their language. We have people who speak the necessary languages in the building with the assistance of the ENL teacher. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development of Teaching Staff, working with the BFSC on updates to regulations and utilizing best practices from their counsel. Looking at what other schools best practices entail and sending staff to those school to learn. Going on regular trainings of various kinds in order to turn key the information to other members in our staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Information throughout the school community will have signs in multiple languages. This information will be sent to the T&I Unit for translation. However, some information will be download from the Department of Education Website. Welcome posters, bathroom signs and signs of directions will be translated by In House School Personnel. In the upcoming year we will be utilizing the services of The Big Word for any notices that require immediate attention. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ELL committee will be creating and distributing parent surveys two times per year to gather feedback on the quality of services. Our parent coordinator Beverly Baptiste will conduct parent questions and answer sessions at least three times a year. During these scheduled meetings, there will be a translator present from the T&I Unit. Parents will be able to discuss there concerns and ask questions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 
