2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q149 School Name: P.S. 149 CHRISTA MCAULIFFE Principal: ONALIS HERNANDEZ 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Christa McAuliffe School 30Q149 343000010149 K-5 School Number (DBN): 93-11 34 th Avenue Jackson Heights, N.Y. 11372 718-898-3630 718-476-1976 Phone Number: OnalisHernandez Fax: Email Address: ohernan3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative:  OnalisHernandez Shannon Fisher RehanaAkter Sabrina Falsetta Andrea Polanco NA SilmadySanchez District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: DR.PhillipComposto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) OnalisHernandez Sabrina Falsetta -(designee) *Principal or Designee RehanAkter Amanda Vender SilmadySanchez Pandora Isaakidis *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Sara Davila- Hamue Doris Ribaric RadhaVatsal Monica Rojas JacqulineTorbio Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) UFT Member UFT Member Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that all students can meet higher standards of excellence. Our school community will design programs that address the children's varied linguistic and cultural backgrounds. Teachers will instill a sense of responsibility and respect for knowledge amongst our students. Parents will become partners with teachers in fostering a love of learning and enjoying the richness of literacy. Together, by building a stronger bridge between the home, school and business community we will achieve our ultimate goal of motivating our children to aspire to the highest educational accomplishment. This is our mission: "To Educate A Child As If He/She Were Our Own." 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 149 Q in Jackson Heights serves as a vital institution to all members of the school community. Among our areas of celebration and promising practices, we are proud to provide program choice for all English Language Learners. Classes in Dual Language are offered across grades K-5. Additionally, we have expanded our English as a New Language push-in program to provide services and additional support to our greater population of English language learners. Our highly qualified and dedicated faculty is committed to the academic success of all learners. Integrated Co-Teaching Services is currently offered in grades K-5 to meet the needs of our Students with Disabilities. Teachers work as a dedicated team of professionals to provide on-going intervention support and monitoring of student progress. Students receive differentiated instruction and individualized attention towards meeting their learning goals within an all-inclusive and nurturing classroom environment. Opportunities for part time integrated services as well as mainstreaming is offered to our students so that they can have the adequate supports to help them strive in their work. Teaching and Learning is supported by the expansive integration of technology that has become a school wide initiative. All classrooms are equipped with SMART Boards, and document cameras to facilitate sharing of student work and other materials that serve for modeling of instruction.. Additionally, there is access to a computer lab, laptop carts, and fully automated school library. The school incorporates all the elements of the Framework for Great Schools by celebrating the rich and diverse heritages of our students and building their academic knowledge within a collaborative, challenging and collegial environment. The school has received recognition as a "Respect for All" school. We pride ourselves in preparing our students morally and ethically to be respectful citizens. PS 149 is a safe school where students are engaged in learning and benefit from the effective level of support they receive for their personal and academic development. One of the school’s goals is to continue to cultivate an inclusive environment where all students develop their personal growth, academic skills, strengths, interests and talents. P.S. 149 is a nurturing and warm school that provides a second home to children, families and staff members. A review of the New York City School Survey 2016-2017 Report indicates a positive and trusting relationship with the parent and teacher community. The survey questions are organized and reported as they relate to the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools. All the positive responses were within the 85% to 97% range with the highest being the element of "trust." Our school hosts a myriad of celebrations and unique opportunities within our academic curricular program. We believe that celebrating all of the milestones, both large and small, validates our students’ efforts and achievements. Classes hold writing celebrations to highlight the end of writing units as well as monthly assemblies to showcase learning done at the end of non-fiction units that are tied to the science or social studies scope and sequence. 2018-19 CEP 10  Celebrations in core academic areas include: International Night, Dr. Seuss Day, 100 th Day of School, Winter/Spring Concerts, Peace Tree Lighting, Warm Your Heart Day and Respect For All/Spirit Week. Our active and vocal Student Government has participated in many “schools in service” activities including the “Mitten Tree” which provides mittens, hats and scarves to needy children. They also visited the local nursing home and sang/danced with senior citizens. This year the school will continue expanding its P.S. 149 School Band with more instruments and "marching" opportunities. In addition, we are the recipients of numerous grants: NYS Extended School Day Violence Prevention Program, Community School Grant, Creative Arts Training Program from CUNY, Flamenco Nuevo for our SWD , Art and Healthy Living and DonorsChoose which provide our teachers with materials to create sensory integrated activities in the self-contained classrooms. P.S. 149 is more than an elementary school, it is a vital institution for all members of the community. Our partnership with the Queens Community House Beacon Program allows our school to open all week, year round, from early morning to late evening. It provides a safe environment for young and old to participate in educational advancement and social interaction. It also provides other community based organizations with a venue for their programs including adult ENL classes, girl scouts, sports, music and the arts. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 13% of our student body are students who have disabilities which range from related service needs such as Speech/ Language, Occupational Therapy (OT) to those requiring 1:1 assistance which range from support with health issues and impairments to support with personal focus and behavior management. The majority of our students are classified as learning disabled and are placed in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes. We have one ICT class at each grade level. We also offer 12:1:1 bridge classes for students who require a smaller setting to reach their individualized goals as well as SETSS pull out services for those students who require minimal intervention in a general education setting. We also have a large ENL population(34%) which receives mandated services in various settings. 50% of our Dual Language program contains student which require ENL services that are provided through their daily instruction. Our ENL teachers provide stand alone services in small groups that are both hetero- and homogeneously grouped throughout the school day. Students who require less stand alone minutes receive push in services during content area instructions. Most of our teachers are TESOL certified and can provide the mandated ENL support during the class day for those students who require it. During weekly meeting we discuss the needs of our students in special programs and provide opportunities to take part in intervention opportunities such as, iReady, targeted intervention in a small group for 6-8 weeks, main streaming opportunities, or enrollment in after school intervention programs. During the school day, self-contained classes have adopted a theme based method of instruction to support the language needs of the students in the class and allow them more opportunities throughout the day, week, and unit to engage with high interest material that aligns to the science or social studies units of study. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework For Great Schools- Rigorous Instruction : (Most Progress) Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 2018-19 CEP 11  Findings The school curricula offers student’s opportunities to engage in rigorous academic tasks that produce meaningful work products aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. Impact The instructional shifts are embedded into the curricula resulting in coherence across grades and subjects. Students are provided with opportunities to demonstrate higher order thinking skills. Supporting Evidence Teachers approach curriculum design from a shared belief that their efforts should focus on students’ needs and alignment to the standards for each grade. There is a strategic and purposeful planning of units and daily lessons. All plans include a learning objective, standards, higher-level questions, tasks/activities, grouping and assessment. A literacy pacing calendar was developed to ensure coherence. After last year’s writing assessment results, teachers in grades 3-5 decided to refine the ReadyGen writing curriculum. They embedded the Teachers’ College units of Writing into the lessons by connecting themes and correlating the standards. As a result, the volume and quality of writing has increased significantly. There is evidence in the classroom that teachers are promoting higher order thinking skills by incorporating more opportunities to discuss higher level questions about a text and to engage deeper with the curriculum by aligning the Passport units with matching Ready Gen benchmark literature and passages. Problem solving in Go Math. Students engage in team talk supporting their claims with evidence from the text. For example, in a mathematics class observed, students assessed all problems solving responses and reasoning behind all responses. Framework For Great Schools- : Rigorous Instruction (Areas of Focus) While most classes are guided by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and a coherent belief around quality instruction, not all classes are marked by high-level questioning and deep student discussion. Our next steps are to provide multiple entry points for all students and create a platform for more student led discussion. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q149 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1054 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 35 46 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 12 46 46 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 74.5% % Reduced Lunch 36.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 85.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 101 98 46 95.0% 1.3% 15.6% 1.3% 9.0% 0.7% 6 18% 6.4 40.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Source: 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report Findings:  Incorporation of new program materials in the middle of 2017-2018 school year demonstrated an increase need for professional development and teacher planning of units of study and strategy lessons to support standards and instruction  While our overall score for Rigorous Instruction did increase .17 points, we are lower than the city in this area  2017-2018 School survey 60% of staff felt that students struggled with having open-ended discussions that require higher ordered thinking skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the level of open-ended question and discussion skills within small group instruction and activities, using the hallmarks of advanced literacy. This will be as evident by at least a 10% increase in the number of ENL & SWD students that progress at least one performance level as based on TCRWP running records and Math performance benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue norming the staff on note taking and execution of running records Classroom Teachers Sept 18-June 19 Using benchmark assessments to plan strategy groups for differentiation K-5 Students Sept 18- June 19 Classroom teachers Instructional Cabinet Classroom teachers, Instructional Cabinet Incorporating AIS and RTi- Tier 1 strategies for students functioning far below grade standards Incorporate open-ended performance task and include all elements of standards as way to progress monitor based on all critical areas (4x/yr) K-5 Sept 18- Classroom Teacher students June 19 SIT Team K-5 Sept 18- Classroom teachers Administration students June 19 Instructional Cabinet Incorporating advanced literacy into unit plans K-5 Sept 18- Classroom teachers students June 19 Instructional Cabinet Incorporating language objectives into unit plans K-5 students Sept 18- June 19 PD opportunities in and out of school to support inquiry work Break down Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy School Wide Staff Sept 18-June 19 School Wide Staff Sept 18-June 19 Expand Blended Units that lead to an increase of end products for units K-5 students Sept 18-June 19 Administration Classroom teachers Instructional Cabinet Administration Administration Instructional Cabinet Administration Classroom Teachers Instructional Cabinet Administration 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019: PTA, Teachers, Guidance, and Administration will - More parent worships letting parents observe in the classroom - Back to School night in September: informing parents about GoMath or reading programs that can be done with students at home - Parent Workshops - Working collaboratively with families to set goals and foster high expectations for student achievement. - Showing families what children are learning, and demystifying grade-level standards and assessments. - Using data to show families how their children are doing. - Signing up to class dojo and establishing a constant and interactive communication with parents. - Making periodical meeting in Tuesdays with parents of ENLs and SWDs to share student portfolios and progress. - Standards-based parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator - Schedule adjustments - AIS providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will increase the level of open-ended question and discussion skills within small group instruction and activities, using the hallmarks of advanced literacy. This will be as evident by at least a 5% increase in the number of ENL & SWD students who move at least one (1) level based on TCRWP running records and Math benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 16  We have met our February goal:  415/458 – 91% of ENL students moved up 1 or more levels in Running Records  137/160 – 86% of SWD students moved up 1 or more levels in Running Records  169/458 - 37% of ENL students moved up 1 level or more in math benchmark assessments 33/160 – 21% of SWD students moved up 1 level or more in math benchmark assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) - TC Running Records - Classroom ELA assessments - Classroom Math assessments - Performance Tasks - Student Portfolios Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Source: OORS Report: 2017-2018 Incident Level and Infraction Summary Findings:   For the 2017-2018 school year there were 170 of level 1-level 4 incidents reported Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of social-emotional learning strategies into the curriculum; classroom practices and routines to help decrease the number of incidents reported in OORS by 10%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Respect for All promotes respect for diversity and strategies to improve social emotional learning. K-5 students Sept 18- June 19 School wide Staff Thrive NYC Mental Health Consultant will provide trainings to teachers and parents on how to promote positive behaviors in school and at home. Violence Prevention Program-Group Leaders provide enrichment activities during the school day, lunch, as well as extended day. They promote social emotional development and learning. Through the arts, the program promotes conflict resolution and improves students' self esteem. lt improves school climate to promote teaching and learning. School staff will continue to implement targeted school wide movements from Move to Improve to provide breaks that will decrease social emotional incidents. K-5 Teachers Sept 18 - June 19 Guidance and Admin Parents Guidance School Aides K-5 students Sept 18- June 19 Administration K-5 students Sept 18- June 19 All Teachers School Staff will receive mindfulness training, Mindfulness helps to improve the regulation of emotions and cognitive focus. K-5 Sept 18- June 19 All Teachers RULER Program is a new initiative to support teachers in ways to identify the needs of the students. There are options for social emotional strategies to be used based on the needs of the class. Incorporate Reader's Theatre to give students an opportunity to express themselves and essentially reduce the number of incidents. Students All Teachers K-5 students Administration Sept 18-June 19 K-5 students All Teachers Sept 18- June 19 Administration 2018-19 CEP 19  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019: PTA, Teachers, Guidance, and Administration will - Maintaining school wide rules and goals - Keeping regular contact between parents and students with frequent social-emotional incidents - Keep opening communication - ClassDojo - PTA meetings - behavior charts that are sent home and signed by parent(s) - invite parents into the classroom for celebrations - read aloud(s) and other special events - Survey parents to find out ways they support their children at home in order to see if the same supports can be offered at school. -Establish a meaningful, differentiated home–school communication system 2018-19 CEP 20  - Materials and digital resources will be provided for students and families. workshops, family night and monthly calendars of classroom/ school wide events. - Through a classroom and school culture that makes students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Routines and clear expectations for behaviors will help facilitate this. - Parent/teacher communication, parent workshops, activities for families Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator - Schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019,there will a 5 % decrease in the number of incidents reported as per the OORS report. We have met this goal: By February 2018 there were 121 incident reports in OORS. By February 2019 there were 71 incident reports in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Source: 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report Findings: According to the 2018-2018 School Survey, in the peer collaboration section, only 78% of teachers feel that they make a conscious effort to coordinate teacher with instruction at other grade levels. Additionally, according to the quality of professional development section, 71% of teachers said that they felt they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school. Data Source: 2018 Advance Report (Summative Conferences) Findings: During End of Year Summative Conferences with administration, an increase of teachers expressed an interest in collaborating with colleagues through inter-visitations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 70% of teachers will participate in inter visitations to enhance student engagement as measured by teacher feedback survey. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Fall Cycle & Spring cycle that will provide 2 opportunities for intervisitation where teachers have the opportunity to visit classes and enhance student engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 students Sept 18- June 19 Teachers Administration Teachers Create standardized feedback sheet & survey that shows impact of visit. Teachers will give feedback on: K-5 students Sept 18-June 19 How does this visit impact your teaching? How does this visit impact your students? 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-5 teachers Administration Instructional Cabinet How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019: PTA, Teachers, Guidance, and Administration will: - More teacher professional development and workshops - Inform parents about the importance of reading together at home, keeping a reading log - Convey the expectations to parents. Make them aware of the important role they play in their child's success and make it clear to parents that their support is needed. Teachers are coming together to share their best practices and parents are welcome to learn more by attending informative sessions presented by teachers. - Parent teacher workshops - Professional development for teachers to create tools and to train them around the specific skills or knowledge in order to promote parent-teacher collaboration. - Teachers will work collaboratively to main streams, instructional structures, curriculum goals, instructional practices and resources. - Plan trips and special presentations as a grade. 2018-19 CEP 23  - Invite parents to sit in and observe classroom practices. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator - Schedule adjustments - AIS providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 40% of teachers will participate in intervisitations to enhance students engagement as measured by teacher feedback. We have not met this goal. We do expect to meet the annual goal by the end of year. Action plan to achieve the end of year goal: - ULIT coach beginning inter-visitation cycles for K-2 - Inter-visitations in accordance with teachers who selected inter-visitations for part of their observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Teacher Feed back survey * P.S. 149 created intervisitation feedback checklist Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Source: 2016-2017 NYC School Survey Report Findings: According to the June 2018 Teachers College Running Record data, ENL students scored below benchmark level: - Kindergarten - 63% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level - 1st Grade - 66% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level - 2nd Grade - 71% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level - 3rd Grade - 73% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level - 4th Grade - 81% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level - 5th Grade - 94% of ENL students were reading below benchmark level Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will monitor progress toward mastery and at least 40% of ENL will move up at least 2 levels in TCRWP running record. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Inquiry teams will meet to look at data in different ways. K-5 teachers Sept 18-June 19 Administration Incorporating AIS and RTi- Tier 1 strategies for students functioning far below grade standards K-5 students Teachers K-5 Teachers Sept 18 - Administration K-5 students June 19 RTi Team PD opportunities that give staff members and opportunity to analyze and dig deeper into benchmark assessments and plan strategy groups Teachers Sept 18- June 19 Continue to create student portfolios to help organize and analyze data K-5 studetns Sept 18 -June 19 Teachers Administration Teachers RTi Team Administration Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019: PTA, Teachers, Guidance, and Administration will: - Offer PD opportunities for staff members to attend PD with a focus on data analysis - By offering parent workshops, parents will feel more comfortable supporting their kids' learning at home. It will also build a relationship between school personnel and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments for inter visitation and mentoring   Materials will be purchased for Monday PD  Professional Development: substitutes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored throughout the year for incremental growth in assuming leadership roles. Target growth percentages are as follows: By February 2019, we will monitor progress toward mastery and at least 25% of ENLs will move up at least 1 level in TCRWP running record. We are currently meeting our February goal. Data from September to January:  415/458 – 91% of ENL students moved up 1 or more levels in Running Records  41/458 students moved 4 or more levels  55/458 moved 3 levels  133/458 moved 2 levels 166/458 moved 1 level Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Source: 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report Findings: - 58% of parents responded positively when asked if they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support this school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be at least 6 monthly interactive learning opportunities and students sharing activities to provide an opportunity for parents to share ideas and work together has a community as measured by monthly school calendar and attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Remind Me App & Class Dojo will help teachers, parents and parent coordinator communicate in a quick and effective way. This will open lines of communication in regards to school activities and other academic reminders. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? parents Sept 18 - June 19 Teachers Community School Grant Initiative will provide activities and or babysitting to help increase parent participation during PTA meetings and workshop. School messenger will inform parents about school activities, school closings, or any necessary updates. More opportunities for parents to attend performance assemblies parents parents parents Flyers will be created about special school events. parents School will create more interactive meetings to provide an opportunity for parents to come together and share ideas, work together, discuss and build the school community. Parents Sept 18- June 19 Sept 18-June 19 Sept 18-June 19 Sept 18-June 19 Sept 18- June 19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Parents PTA School Secretaries Teachers Administration PTA Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Leadership Group ThriveNYC partnership with DOH Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator - Schedule adjustments 2018-19 CEP 29  - AIS providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least 3 monthly interactive learning opportunities and students sharing activities to provide an opportunity for parents to share ideas and work together has a community as measured by monthly school calendar and attendance sheets. We have met this goal: Below are all of the workshops through February: Beacon Parent Workshops International Festival of Lights Hot Coco Mingle Movie Night Legends Classic Basketball Game Halloween Party Thanksgiving Family Dinner Annual Holiday Party Tuesday Family Engagement Workshops Procedures and Regulations Safety Procedures Attendance Middle school IEP 2018-19 CEP 30  Wellness/Stress ESL Support iReady at Home K-2 iReady at Home 3-5 Math K-2 Math 3-5 NY State Math test Grade 3 Technology/ Art Music/ Fitness PTA Parent Workshops More Workshops Become a volunteer Dial Teacher Active Parenting Now-Western Queens NYC schools Account Nutrition -Cornell University Bullying Zumba Class Mommy & Me Program Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. * school created survey *Parent coordinator log sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TC Independent Reading Level Assessment, New York State ELA, Writing task rubrics Mathematics Go Math! Chapter tests, New York State Math Exam, Daily classroom “quick checks” Science Unit tests, project rubric Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Title I Reading - NY Ready- reinforces major reading skills. Guided Reading Groups Reading Plus (3-5) iReady(K-2) After School Program (2-5) Title I Math - reinforces basic math skills. After School Programs- Think Central, Mega Math and iTools-reinforces major math concepts, fluency, and problem solving techniques Content Area Vocabulary, Scientific Method, Essay writing. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group and One-to-One During School and After School Small Group During School and After School Small Group During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 32  Social Studies Extended Response, project rubric At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent-Teacher Conferences, Teacher observation Content Area Vocabulary, Document Based Questioning, Primary Sources, Debates, Map Skills, Essay Writing. Guidance Counselor/School Psychologist: At-Risk Counseling GIG Lunch Group-build socialization skills Small Group During the School Day Small Group During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently 20% (234/ 1187) of our student population live in temporary housing. This includes 230 students that have doubled up and four students living in shelter or other temporary living situations. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP 34  Funds are set aside for students in temporary housing. Students are eligible to receive services that are comparable to services provided to non-homeless students. These services may include, but are not limited to assistance with purchasing school uniforms, school supplies, and books, reading glasses, accommodated transportation, trip /recreational expenses and basic emergency supplies. PS 149 is dedicated to delivering an academically rigorous, equitable education and emotionally nurturing program to all its students while addressing the specific needs of students in temporary housing. If necessary, counseling will be offered in school or through an outside agency recommended by guidance counselors. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● We have established a partnership with the Teaching Fellows Program and several universities such as St. John’s University, CCNY, and Queens College as a way of acquiring highly qualified teachers for our school’s vacancies. We have a committee of Assistant Principals and Coaches to review resumes and interview highly qualified candidates. ● Mentoring is provided to newly hired teachers by the coaches. ● Reading, Writing and GoMath! Professional Development is provided. ● Professional Development is conducted by Assistant Principals to support the mandates of professional responsibilities such as: classroom environment, school handbook, record keeping etc. ● Principal provides training in the area of creating a professional portfolio.  Tuition assistance is provided for the completion of college courses necessary for certification. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals were involved in training around the Common Core Learning Standards by participating in the following workshops:  Professional Development Mondays - Inquiry Teams: Kindergarten ELA, 1st Grade ELA, 2nd Grade ELA, K-2 Math, 3rd Grade ELA, 4th Grade ELA, 5th Grade ELA, 3-5 Math, Self-Contained Math Group, Content Area ELA Group PD Cycle Topics: Guided Reading, Formative Assessments, Amplify Science, Developing Rigorous Curriculum Maps, IEP Review 2018-19 CEP 36  November 6, 2018 Chancellor Conference Day- Using Writing Data to Plan Strategy Groups, Using Math Item Skills Analysis Data Report, Using data to plan inquiry, Applying Social Emotional Learning Standards, Analyzing school wide iReady data Lunch & Learns Common Planning Grade Meetings Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A Gift Package with information on school hours, uniform, and activities to prepare incoming students is provided to all parents during the parent orientation in May. During the May Orientation, parents view a mandated video from the Chancellor explaining all programs offered in NYC as well as those offered at our school. The selection process is explained by several pedagogues and Assistant Principal. Incoming students are placed in the program of choice (1 or 2) that parents feel is best for their children. Incoming Students are met with friendly staff members to test their English Proficiency Level. If parents indicated another language other than English is spoken at home, students are given the LABR which assess their level in English. Parents meet their Kindergarten Teacher during a parent meeting where expectations and policies are reviewed and questions or concerns from parents are addressed. 2018-19 CEP 37  Our Incoming Kindergarten students are invited to attend Mommy and Me the year before starting Kindergarten if they have a sibling enrolled in our school. Preschool children and their parents are invited to participate in the "Mommy & Me" program which begins in November and runs throughout the course of the school year. The program serves as an introduction into P.S.149's curriculum and covers similar lesson plans as those that will be taught in their Kindergarten classrooms. These theme based lesson plans consist of: read aloud activities, practicing fine motor skills such as cutting, coloring, and tracing, learning and singing nursery rhymes, and take home assignments. This program aids in assimilating both students and parents to the school and classrooms. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During grade-level planning sessions, teacher teams, data specialist /SETTS provider and key stakeholders such as principal, assistant principals, and teachers meet to discuss the selection of assessments, and the use of data to drive targeted instruction. Common Core Aligned rubrics are reviewed so that all teachers are aware of the standards called for in the assessments. Students use checklists that match the teacher selected tasks to assess their own work. Reading and Math unit tests provide teachers with data that is used to support students’ overall academic progress. In addition, the MOSL selection process was teacher driven to assure alignment of grade/subject level assignments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 654,615 174,786 46,414 0 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 2018-19 CEP 38  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 6,635,496 X 5A, 5B, 5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 39  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 149Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 2018-19 CEP 41 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Annual Title 1 Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/ activities during Parent-Teacher Conference and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title 1 Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/ guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children's progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home, in a format and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Te School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 149Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 43  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● ensuring success by providing differentiated instruction to address student needs; ● conducting Parent-Teacher Conferences twice a year; ● conducting workshops for parent and students in Grades 3-5 to discuss Common Core Learning Standards and New York State ELA, Math and Science Tests ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Literacy and Math workshops, Nutrition Committee; ● providing training for parents to become certified as Learning Leaders Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Our School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding annual Title 1 Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting education family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conference and throughout the school year  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title 1 Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/ Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children's progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/ folders for regular written communication between/ teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. ● c 2018-19 CEP 45  III. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; IV. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attending school regularly and arrive on time; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● completing my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● following the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● showing respect for myself, other people and property; ● trying to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always trying my best to learn . 2018-19 CEP 47  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? This is our first year as a community school. We are working in collaboration with Queens Community House to provide members of the community access to Enrichment Programs such as Robotics and Band. We are also starting a newcomers Club for our ENL students in grades 2-5 that have been in the country for less than three years and require targeted language support besides the work done during the school day. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018, we will decrease our chronic student lateness by 3% as measured through daily attendance monitoring, regular team meeting to examine patterns and support of the students and families with the Success Mentor program of the Community School and CBO partnership. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? TBD Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Queens Community House ELL Family Engagement TBD Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TBD 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Queens Community House has identified a Community Director that is working with us to increase Family Engagement and decrease chronic attendance patterns. The director has been sitting in on monthly attendance meetings, SLT meeting and is working with the Parent Coordinator to gather information needed. 2. Attendance - Family Engagement - 3. Advisory Meetings 4. Attendance Meetings, Cabinet Meetings Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP 49  TBD Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. * TBD Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 2017 - June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: All After School Programs will include supplemental services for ELLS and English Proficient students in Dual Language programs as well as in ELLs in English classes. The students attending will be Developing ELLs who according to the 2018 handscored NYSESLAT scores were at transitioning/expanding levels. This information will be revisited when we receive the actual results at the end of the summer. The after school programs will target students in grades 3-5 who are Developing ELLs at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. The supplemental programs will included direct instruction after school as well as high quality professional development. Activities planned will support language development in English and Native Language instruction, and high academic achievement in Math and ELA for all students in the program. All programs are based on the needs of our students and are aligned to support language proficiency in both languages. This program will target our English Language Learners and Second Language Learners in the dual classes and English classes. According to the school's 2017-2018 preliminary scores that the ENL Department hand scored, the majority of out students scored at the transitioning and expanding levels. We would like to push the students to further improve their proficiency levels by targeting all four modalities especially those that proved to be challenging. We will use the EDAT and the RSMR to show the exact levels at each modality. Attendance will be taken by the classroom teacher during the duration of the program. There will be an outreach to parents when students do not attend the program. Letters regarding description and duration of program will be provided in the parent's preferred language. The ELL After School Academy will meet two times per week commencing approximately in November 2018 and end approximately March 2019. The program will take place from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. for approximately 32 sessions. Group size will be maintained at approximately 15-20 students per class. There will be a total of seven (7) ELL classes. The teachers providing the support will be four (4) ENL Teachers and three (4) Content Area teachers. The instruction provided will be aligned with the Next Generation Learning Standards as well as ENL Standards. Instruction will focus on Literacy and Math in English incorporating ENL strategies and methodologies. All students will be given Math and English Support by their teachers who will incorporate scaffolds, ENL strategies, and small group instruction that targets both their strengths and their weaknesses. They will incorporate the data from the EDAT to support their instruction and make it individualized. Additionally, there will be a focus on vocabulary development, test taking strategies, writing skills and reading comprehension. Supplementary materials will be provided to increase ENL and Math Instruction. General instructional supplies such as chart paper, paper, markers, pencils, notebooks, texts, will be purchased to support the After School Academies. The estimated dates for the professional development will be November 21st, 2018 from 2:30pm to 4:00pmand February 13th, 2019 from 2:30pm to 4:00. During these sessions we will analyze student data and plan for instruction. Several programs will be used to improve English Language Arts learning. For the English Language Learners, "Language Power", "Grab and Go" Go Math, and New York Finish Line for ELLs are some of the resources we are planning on using to teach our ELLs. These programs 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will be used to improve teaching and the learning of core subject areas. They will be used to prepare students in taking the ELA, Math and NYSESLAT exams as well. These programs will be aligned with the NGLS. The program will support student's development of vocabulary through best teaching practices in a standards-based instruction. ENL strategies will be incorporated in the teaching of students to support language acquisition in all four modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) across subject areas. The Grab and Go component in Go Math will provide hands on activities to acquire necessary skills in problem solving. Technology will also be incorporating Think Central which is part of the Go Math curriculum with many interactive Math tools which provide both enrichment and reteaching activities. Students will have access to manipulatives when problem solving and learning conceptual math skills. The Dual Language After-School Program will service ELLs and English Proficient students. The program will provide enrichment in both languages as well as additional academic support in both first and second language development. The Dual Language After- School Program will meet two times a week beginning November 2018 through March 2019 from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. for 32 sessions. All students in Dual Classes from grades 3-5 will be invited. The language of instruction will be Spanish and English. There will be a total of eight (8) classes. Instruction will be delivered by certified Bilingual classroom teachers. This program will address student's needs in first and second language acquisition. There will be a concentrated focus on developing fluency and comprehension skills and instruction that focuses on Literacy and Math in English. Additionally, teachers will focus on developing vocabulary, test taking skills, strategies and writing skills. Supplementary materials will be provided to increase ENL, SSL and Math Instruction. Materials will consist of Using Language Power which provides Non Fiction learning tasks in English and A-Z Raz program that provides both English and Spanish reading and writing tasks across all disciplines. General instructional supplies such as chart paper, paper, markers, pencils, literature, and notebooks will be purchased to support the After School Academy. The language of instruction will be both English and Spanish. This will support our school's dual language program as it exist during the school day and provide students with the extra support in both English and Spanish. Teachers will use various genres in literature to support the NGLS in both languages. Students will be writing in their journals in both languages and in various genres. Teachers will teach Math enrichment activities incorporating the data they have from each student. The estimated dates for the professional development will be November 21st, 2018 from 2:30pm to 4:00pm and February 13th, 2019 from 2:30pm to 4:00. During these sessions we will analyze student data and plan for instruction. One Supervisor will supervise both programs after school. The programs will be covered under Title I and Title III funds. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 149Q's Title III Professional Development program will focus on providing teachers participating in the Title III program with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development exceed the state exams and embed the New Generation Learning Standards. The professional development sessions will be facilitated by a school administrator and lead teachers . The professional development topics listed below will be tailored for the teachers participating in the Title III program. The session will be scheduled during the course of the program and conducted after-school hours for a duration of 2 hours. There will be two professional development sessions during the couse of instruction. Participating teachers along with the program supervisor will be paid per-session rate for attending, participating and assessing the instructional plan of the supplemental program. Attendance will be taken at all professional development workshops. Agenda for workshops along with the attendance records will be maintained in the Title III Binder in the Assistant Principal's office. Professional Development will include: • School based workshops focused on analyzing results from the 2018 NYSESLAT, New York Math State and ELA exam. We will use the data from the EDAT and the RMSR to analyze the student's strengths and challenges. Each modality will be a focus and ways in which teachers can support the students at their particular levels. The ELA and Math scores will be used to also drive instruction and teach to the student's needs. Student data will be presented to classroom teachers and ENL teachers prior to the learning sessions so that they can become familiarized with the student's data and individualize instruction based on students’ needs. • School based professional development sessions devoted to the supporting strategies and methodologies that ELLs need to succeed in achieving and mastering city and state standards. Targets of Measurement (TOMs) will be reviewed so that teachers know exactly what skills should be addressed and targeted as per the NYSESLAT. This information will not only support student learning during the after school program, but also support their needs during daily instruction. • School based professional development session will be devoted to developing lesson plans that include language objectives. • Teachers will receive additional professional development in improving teaching and learning in core subject areas. Teachers will be trained on how to use the resources provided to support student's learning. Incorporating and supporting vocabulary development and high utility words will be a major part of the learning sessions. • School based professional development session will be devoted to scaffolding strategies across the disciplines as well as differentiating instruction. The above workshops will have a positive impact on the learning of ELLs because teachers will hone in on the strengths and challenges their students are facing. Teachers will amplify their lessons and differentiate the instruction using the data from the NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math state scores. The RSMR and the EDAT will be analyzed to monitor the progression at each particular modality. Discussions will include ways that teachers can target these modalities. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 149Q will begin to host parent workshops beginning November 2018 to March 2019. These workshops will focus on how best parents can support their students at home. Areas 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities to focus will be reading, writing, and math. Workshops on the characteristics of leveled books from A-Z will be provided to parents. In this manner parent will have information on what skills their child needs to move up in reading levels. Parents will be trained as to what types of questioning (open-ended) to ask of their child to encourage and development conversational skills such as Speaking. The workshop will be interactive where the teacher will model reading strategies that the students can practice at home. The professional development will be funded by the school with non-Title III allocation. Since 39% of the student population is identified as ELLs, PS 149 makes necessary translation arrangements available for all parent involvement activities to accommodate parents of ELLs. Parents are notified of these activities through flyers, newsletters, and parent engagement meetings in their preferred language. • Parent Workshops throughout the year are scheduled to keep families up to date on important school information and testing. • Family Literacy Night- parents and students share wonderful activities in reading and writing. Parents and children rotate through different areas where they create bookmarks, read stories to their children, create poems and book making. Also, a section on parent literature is set to help parents understand ways they can help in their children's education, particularly in the reading and writing process, homework help and routines. * International Night- Parents and school staff will come together and host a night of sharing diversity through international dishes, music, and culture. • Math Night - parents and students share wonderful experiences in math as they rotate through different centers. Parents and their children have an opportunity to play mathematical games and problem solve together. Newsletters will be sent home on a monthly basis as an additional means to communicate to parents important schools events. • The Parent Coordinator of the school also provides the parents with information on the Learning Leaders Program and other upcoming educational workshops geared to helping their children succeed in school. The Learning Leader's activities includes but are not limited to the following: * Learning Leaders-Certification Program: is a training program which teaches parents and community volunteers to work one-on-one in groups with students and classroom teachers. This program is a three session workshop which is required in order to be certified. All participants are screened and must provide three references. During PTA meetings, PS149 will host activities for parents. These activities and workshops will take place from 5:30pm to 6:30 pm following the PTA meeting once a month. Topics and activities will be formulated based on the needs of the community. Workshops are geared towards the sharing of information that will continue to support the learning across all disciplines at home for all students, including ELLs. Teachers will begin planning for informative workshops on Parent Engagement Tuesdays for the grades they teach. Such workshops will consist of preparing their children for success in reading, writing and across all content areas. Teachers will also present the activities and purpose of the After school programs and how best to support their children at home. ENL teachers will provide information to ELL parents on how best to support their child's native language at home, as well as how to prepare them for acquiring English language proficiency. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Gil, will keep records of all PTA meetings as well as Parent Activities. Teachers will have sign in sheets for the workshops and activities they create with parents. At the end the attendance sheets will be collected by the parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Christa McAuliffe School Borough Queens School Number 149 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Onalis Hernandez Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Arlene Fernandez Teacher/Subject Area Karen Salinas/ ENL Letty Vaca/ Teacher/Subject Area Maryann Stefatos /ENL Related-Service Provider Sara Davila Hamue BIlingual Superintendent Philip Composto Assistant Principal Mayra Ruiz Lotito Coach n/a School Counselor Odalis Fernandez Parent Patricia Vera Parent Coordinator Adriana Gil Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) Ellizabeth Dellabadia/ SETTS C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 11 0 11 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 14 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 15 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 14 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1040 Total number of ELLs 366 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 35.19% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 2 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 2 2 4 0 2 2 3 0 3 3 2 1 2 3 5 0 3 3 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 14 0 0 15 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS . 149Q monitors student progress in English through the Teacher’s College benchmark system across four yearly assessment windows. This system uses the Fountas and Pinnell reading levels to align to grade level standards. Teachers often assess in between assessment windows if a student has demonstrated accelerated progress. Additionally, these assessments are available in Spanish (K-2). Our Dual Language classes assess students’ independent reading levels in both languages. The Spanish language assessment in K-5 is called the WRAP, which measures student proficiency levels in reading and writing using both Fiction and Non Fiction texts. Additionally, the Estrellita program assesses Spanish phonemic awareness in grades K and 1. The Teacher’s College assessments also include letter and word recognition assessments for students who are reading at a level A through H. Students in every grade, K-5, are assessed in writing using the Teacher’s College On-the-Spot writing piece at the end of each unit. The data obtained assists teachers in determining if students have truly grasped knowledge of skills 2018-19 CEP 58  learned in the Writing Unit that month. This data will inform teachers of appropriate next steps and what differentiation is needed to best assist the students in being successful. The data is then used to form and drive instruction as well as the forming of groups. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At PS 149Q we provide teachers with four full day of coverages to allow them to assess students in both English and Spanish (dual). Teachers attended a professional development session on teaching Spanish phonics using the Estrellita program. Teachers are given the WRAP Spanish assessment as a tool in assessing Spanish language proficiency. In addition to the four times a year assessments, teachers test students in between if they feel the students have shown accelerated progress in reading levels. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments we use as baseline/benchmarks are the NYC Math BOY and EOY Performance Tasks for grades K-2. We use the Teacher’s College Running Records for grades K-5 to assess independent and instructional reading levels. To assess the Spanish proficiency levels of our Dual Language students we administer the ELE every Spring. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We offer our ELLs-SWD intervention in ELA and Math as well as other content areas through after-school programs. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades 3-5 provides instruction and practice for editing, constructive responses, short responses, extended responses and how to use graphic organizers to organize information. This program is correlated to meet the ELA core curriculum standards and the Common Core Learning Standards. We also offer math intervention that incorporates the teaching of Math using a math program that provides instruction matched to the New York Math State Test. Teachers teach in small groups in order to differentiate the instruction and target specific skills that students are struggling with. This program also offers ELLs instruction that is tailored in teaching academic vocabulary and word solving strategies for content area reading in Science and Social Studies. ELLs are provided intervention using the iReady Reading Program with a Bilingual/ENL Service Provider. Data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT is used to plan for small group work as well as an After School Program for Grades K-2 that focuses on building language skills and incorporating the four modalities during instruction. Teachers embed the Targets of Measurement to prepare students for the Spring NYSESLAT exam. Newcomers work with a ENL/Bilingual provider during small group instruction with a focus on vocabulary development during the instructional day and in an after school program tailored for Newcomers. Teachers in grades K-2 incorporate the Fundations Phonics Program to provide students with support in achieving phonemic awareness. Additionally, ENL providers incorporate Learning A-Z Reading/Writing program during small group instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ] At PS 149Q the data from the NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math State Exams are analyzed to inform ourselves on the levels of each student. Students are given their mandated periods of ELL instruction by a certified ENL provider. In order to facilitate our ELL support school wide, we embed ESL strategies and the information from the EDAT to provide appropriate scaffolds during instruction. If the students are at the emerging/entering proficiency levels they received Standalone instruction as per CR Part 154 as well as integrated periods of instruction. In addition to the mandated periods of instruction by ENL providers, many students receive supplementary support in both Literacy and Math. The ELA and the Math data are also used to provide small group instruction with reading and AIS staff members. All assessments are considered, formally, and informally when planning for After school Programs and for providing the extra support for ELLs. The ELL Data Analysis Report is used to determine the risk levels of each student and to provide the necessary support to strengthen areas of need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 59  The results of all assessments are analyzed by the teacher teams on each grade, support staff, out of classroom teachers and administration during professional development. Teachers are given the results of their students’ progress or levels on all assessments. Using the data and the information it provides such as students strengths and challenge, teachers plan with one another on how to best support these areas in their daily instruction. Teachers plan for multiple entry points, and differentiating instruction for specific students. ENL teachers, reading teachers, AIS teachers, are also involved in supporting and meeting the needs of the students either through small group work, iReady, Fundations, and a balanced literacy approach. Inquiry teacher teams are also part of the dissemination of this data and plan for problem of practice. Together an intervention plan is created depending on the areas of need. Children are made aware of their strengths and weaknesses and use a self-monitoring checklist to independently demonstrate responsibility, ownership and investment in their learning. For example, throughout our TC writing units, students routinely refer to the rubric that will be used to assess their work at the conclusion of the unit and monitor their progress independently or with a peer partner. A checklist is kept in their working writing folders. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL program consists of heterogeneous students of mixed proficiency levels. Many of the teachers at PS149Q are ENL certified. These teachers consist of both classroom teachers and ENL providers. ENL instruction is provided with an emphasis on English language acquisition. Students come from many backgrounds but most of our ELL population are Spanish speakers. The teachers who are not ENL certified are provided with a ENL Push In teacher during the Integrated Model. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher work collaboratively and participate in professional development trainings together. The ENL teacher provides instruction in building English language skills through content area and ELA. The ENL providers also use the Standalone Model when working with groups of students who are at the Entering/Emerging proficiency levels. The focus is to help students develop English language skills that are necessary to succeed in core content courses. This is accomplished through ENL instruction during phonics, balanced literacy, and incorporating listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Stand Alone is delivered as a pull out program by the licensed ENL teacher (4 times per week for Entering and Emerging students). b. TBE program. If applicable. Our Bilingual program receives Standalone ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. The delivery of instruction is implemented using a pull out program. The classroom teacher provides ENL instruction to her own students as well. Emphasis is placed on developing English language skills in the content area. c. DL program. If applicable. All K-5 teachers in the Dual Language Program are ENL and Bilingual certified. These teachers offer English language skills instruction to the ELLs in their class. During the Stand Alone periods, ENL providers work with small groups of ELLs. These providers pull out small groups of students who are in the Entering and Emerging Proficiency level and work with them on acquiring English skills. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school will follow the mandated instructional minutes as per CR Part 154. Students will receive either one, two, or .5 units of mandated services according to the proficiency level they have achieved in the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL exams. Students will 2018-19 CEP 60  be taught both ENL, ELA, and HLA in the Standalone and/or Integrated Model. Proficiency levels will determine both the amount of minutes and the model to be used. Home language support and Translanguaging will be integrated into all program models. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL strategies and methodologies are provided through the Common Core Literacy and Math Programs, “ReadyGEN", “Go Math!" and “Teacher's College Writing Project.” In the Dual Language classes, small group instruction is provided during the day by a Reading Teacher, ENL Teacher, and Common branch Teacher either Bilingual or Monolingual. Other subjects such as word study, literacy centers, and Estrellita is incorporated to provide HLA. Teachers use multi-level approaches in the teaching of Language Arts to limited English proficient/English Language Learners. An emphasis is placed on amplifying lessons to better meet the needs of students. When pushing in during content area instruction, ENL providers work collaboratively with content area teachers and classroom teachers in planning lessons that incorporate vocabulary development, ENL methodologies and scaffolding. Bilingual/ENL AIS providers work with ELLs in small groups and target areas of need such as Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking skills using iReady, FUNdations, balanced literacy, phonics, ELA, and content area instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native language using the Writing and Reading Assessment Profile (WRAP) in Spanish and Estrellita Phonics assessment in dual classrooms in grades Kindergarten and One. We administer the ELE in the Spring to all students in the bilingual programs to determine target language proficiency. All the above assessments are used to assess students' native language proficiency levels in Spanish as well as to assess second language proficiency levels for English Proficient students in Dual Language programs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All ELLs-SWDs are provided their mandated periods of ENL instruction by certified ENL teachers. Teachers implement ENL methodologies and strategies across all subject areas. ENL Push In teachers and classroom teachers work collaboratively in differentiating instruction during small groups. Checklist, rubrics and student data is used to targert areas of need. Students are also provided with Bilingual AIS/ENL supplementary support that is in addition to their mandated services. The group of students receiving supplementary support include Newcomers, Developing, and Former ELLs. Teachers work with small groups of students who are far below grade level or those needing additional support in certain skills. Many ENL techniques such as modeling, prompting, NLA support, translanguaging, academic language, and visual aides are incorporated lessons. Student's accommodations and will be provided their 90 minutes of ENL instruction in the Integrated Model approach with two teachers co-teaching. Presently, there are no Long Term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We offer our ELLs-SWD intervention in ELA and Math as well as other content areas through our after school programs. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades K-5 provides instruction and practice for editing, constructive responses, short responses, extended responses and how to use graphic organizers to organize information. This program is correlated to meet the new ELA core curriculum standards and the Common Core Learning Standards. We also offer math intervention that incorporates the teaching of Math using a math program that provides instruction matched to the New York Math State Test. Teachers teach in small groups in order to differentiate the instruction and target specific skills that students are 2018-19 CEP 61  struggling with. This program also offers ELLs a program that is tailored in teaching academic vocabulary and word solving strategies for content area reading in Science and Social Studies. ELLs-SWDs are provided intervention using iReady Reading Program through a Bilingual/ENL Service Providers. For Newcomers in the primary grades, reading, writing, listening and speaking skills are embedded during balanced literacy. For struggling ELLs-SWDs, interventions through Fundations is provided. We also extended our Supplemental Title III LEP to Early Childhood grades K-2. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Push-in ENL teachers push into ICT classrooms during content area. Teacher Teams meet every Monday to discuss trends and patterns of the grades after studying student data and assessments. ENL and AIS providers are part of the Teacher Team Meetings and Common Prep Planning. Teachers working with ELL-SWDs familiarize themselves with their IEPs to gather information on the student's challenges as well as strengths. With this knowledge, they plan instruction and deliver instruction that best meets the student's needs with the proper support and intervention. Teachers that work with the ELL-SWDs are also invited to attend common prep planning sessions with the grades they mostly service. ENL teachers, for example, have one common prep a week with the grade they mostly service in order to be part of the planning process. During this time, they also discuss and analyze the data of the the students they work with. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer our ELLs intervention in ELA and Math as well as other content areas through after school programs. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades 3-5 provides rigorous instruction and practice in text complexity, editing constructive responses, short responses, extended responses and in using graphic organizers to organize information. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades K-2 was implemented for the first time in 2017. Emerging and Entering ELL students in the primary grades were invited to receive additional support in a small group setting with ENL teachers. The program targeted language acquisition with a particular focus in reading and writing and in preparing the students for the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT. This programs correlates to the ELA core curriculum standards and Common Core Learning Standards. We also offer math intervention that incorporates the teaching of Math using the additional sources in the Go Math! math curriculum. Technology is incorporated into the teaching of Math skills. The Go Math! program provides instruction matched to the New York Math State Test and Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers teach in small groups in order to differentiate the instruction and target specific skills that students are struggling with. During literacy intervention, instruction is tailored in teaching students academic vocabulary and word solving strategies for content area reading in Science and Social Studies. Lower grade students receive such intervention in literacy through iReady, FUNdations, and balanced literacy. Additionally, the A-Z Learning program has been incorporated into most K-5 classrooms for intervention and assessment support throughout the year. When possible, ELLs are provided supplemental periods of ENL and reading instruction in addition to the mandated periods they receive as per NYS CR Part 154. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ENL Providers will continue pushing in to the classroom as well as pulling out students in order to meet the mandated units of ENL instruction. Additional supplementary support periods will be provided to continue delivery of instruction to struggling students. Teachers will work with small groups using ENL methodologies and strategies. Interventions such as IReady, Fundations, balanced literacy, and differentiated instruction tailored to meet individual student's needs will be continued. In addition Learning A-Z will is available for students to use at home. In order to improve our home-school connections with our multi-linguistic community, all teachers were provided a spiral-bound handbook on the free translation and interpretations services available from the Department of Education. This information is made accessible for NYC DOE documents that contain critical information for parents about their child's education. Teachers can contact the Interpretation and Translations Department for translating their own letters in the parent' language of choice. The handbook details the steps to use to request a phone conference with a specific language translator as well as what languages are available. Teachers use this service to meet with ELL parents regarding their child’s progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 62  N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S. 149Q, all English Language Learners participate in all school activities and programs such as Art, Gym, Music, and Technology. In addition our school chorus and band consist of many students including our ELLs and SWDs. Explicit ENL instruction is continuously provided during literacy and content area during day as well as after school. Students are given the opportunity to attend after school programs through the Title III supplemental program. During this time, students work in smaller group settings and receive small group instruction in academic and and vocabulary development as well as in acquiring English language proficiency. Students are provided literacy and mathematical support in areas of need. The dual language classrooms will provide additional support in native language acquisition as well as continue strengthening the English skills students needed to succeed in acquiring English proficiency. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers use the DELLS Learning A-Z Reading and Writing Program across all grades. Technology is incorporated to support lessons such as using Smart boards, document readers, laptops, listening centers, Ipads, books with CD’s, etc. In addition, ENL strategies and methodologies are provided across all content areas. Teachers provide students with needed scaffolds during instruction. Teachers are using the ENL components in the ReadyGen literacy program and GoMath math program to provide instruction for ELLs. Native language support through translanguaging is provided to all our ELLS. Outreach has been made to publishing companies for literature in Mandarin, Urdu, and Bengali. These materials will support ELLs learning of a new language while embedding native language as a scaffold.. Teachers also use technology to include student's culture and customs in the curriculum. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Dual Language program, Kindergarten- Fifth Grade, the 50/50 Model is used. The language of instruction is all English on one day, and all Spanish the following day. The ReadyGen Reading and Writing curriculum is only available in English. However, teachers have come together and worked on translating the units. This will allow access for the 50/50 implementation of both languages equally. Students in the Dual Language Model publish in both languages. Students receive literacy instruction and Math instruction in their native language as well as in English. A Science and Math glossary was provided to the dual and bilingual classes in grades K-5 to support both ENL and HLA instruction. All classrooms have computers, Smart Boards, and document readers to facilitate delivery of instruction in all programs. In the ENL Model, students who needs HLA support are buddied up with a partner who speaks their native language. Translanguaging is provided to students when possible. Students are provided English and Spanish texts. Dual language teachers receive a Computer Prep and the Computer teacher offers classroom instruction in the language used that day. New admits are encouraged to write in their home language and receive Stand Alone ENL instruction that provides our ELLs with language acquisition skills. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to our students’ ages and grade levels accordingly. Differentiation of instruction , multiple entry points and materials are taken into consideration to better amplify academic instruction. Students are also provided with high interest books that are age appropriate for them. Students are supported academically with visuals, prompts, scaffolds, translanguaging, literature, reading programs, ENL, Reading and AIS support, technology and a buddy system is encouraged in the building of peer support. Students are exposed to cognates to support their Spanish language and to facilitate the connection to the English language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 63  Newly enrolled ELL students and their parents are given a parent orientation that details all the programs offered in our school throughout the school year. This orientation is offered by the Assistant Principal, Kindergarten teachers, ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator. In addition, a special Kindergarten Orientation is provided for all parents of incoming Kindergarten students in May. The meeting is provided by the Assistant Principal, Kindergarten teachers, Parent Coordinator, ENL teachers, School Counselor, and School Nurse. During this time, programs are discussed in detail. Parents are given a tour of the school, as well as classrooms. A summer package is given to all incoming students during this time to prepare them for the new year. A special orientation is also offered to incoming third grade students from PS 228 and PS 222 every May. Parents are given a tour of the school and the opportunity to visit Third Grade classrooms. This takes place during parent engagement Tuesday. At this meeting teachers share with parents/guardians the expectations of the grade as well as ways parents can help their child transition to their new school. A summer package with books is provided to all students in grades K-5 at the end of the year to prepare them for their new grade. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered at PS 149Q. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development topics presented in the past to support staff members assisting ELLs are: Interpreting the RNMR/ITEL Summary report that details the proficiency levels. Teachers use this information to assess the needs of the ELLs they service and plan instruction accordingly to help students achieve growth in English proficiency. Teachers also receive information during staff development days, curriculum meetings, and common prep planning sessions presented by staff members. Teachers are provided with a toolkit of ENL strategies they can use to assist and support our ELLs in language acquisition. Articles on the teaching of ELLs that include strategies and creating language objectives are made available to all teachers during the year. Such information consists of the various needs of our ELLs such as understanding second language development, specific strategies needed to support the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills, Tier I, II, and III vocabulary, cognates, and scaffolding techniques. Teachers take part in intervisitation visits across grades and classes. A follow up debriefing always takes place where best practices are discussed as well as next steps. Teachers turnkey information to other staff members during professional development on Mondays and at various times in the year. The ENL providers have been given a common prep period with the grade they mostly service in order to plan ahead for future lessons and to familiarize themselves with the curriculum. The ENL Department meets weekly to discuss the testing of new admits, compliance, and planning. Inquiry work on specific students is analyzed and discussed. Inquiry teams discussions are also gathered around the needs and learning trends of all diverse learners including English Language Learners. Teachers share information during teacher team meetings on successful and effective techniques that support the teaching of ELLs. Teachers attend professional development offered outside of the school building. They share the information with the Assistant Principal and turnkey pertinent information to key staff members such as classroom teachers, ENL providers, and out of classroom teachers during professional development cycles. Before the commencement of a new Professional Development Cycle, teachers are given a choice of topics they feel will support their teaching of ELLs and sign up for the workshop which 2018-19 CEP 64  lasts approximately six weeks. The cycles consists of various topics and are given by our own staff. In addition, PS149Q has continued the work formed from a partnership with CUNY on translanguaging. The learning and teaching of translanguaging supports ours ELLs in strengthening their understanding of the English language. The teachers of Dual have taken a leadership role in the turn keying of important translanguaging practices to other staff members who work with ELLs students. Some of the Workshop Titles attended outside of the building this year are: Designing Instructional Support for ELL Success, Learning A-Z Reading and Writing program, Collaborating to Share Best Practices in Bilingual/Dual Language Classrooms, Engaging Minds with the New Curriculum, Meeting the Social Emotional Needs of the ENL Classroom, Access and Engagement for ELLs, and ELL Professional Learning. Intervisitations to other schools has also been taking place as we continue to strive in growing and learning on honing in on best practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school will provide a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154. This Professional Development will be dedicated to language acquisition with a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For Dual and ENL teachers a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content (Science, Social Studies, Math) including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. All professional development attendance sheets are kept in binders in the main office. Throughout the school year, teachers attend various professional development workshops on the teaching of ELLs and turnkey during professional development cycles. This practice will continue in the upcoming school year. ENL workshops offered by the Department of Education is posted in the Main Office to keep teachers informed of their availability. Our translanguaging team will continue the work started four years ago on the benefits and success of translanguaging in the classroom. The team consists of dual language teachers who will work together in presenting to the staff the benefits and purpose of embedding tranlanguaging strategies and techniques into the curriculum to better support their student's HLA. These teacher collaborate and meet to discuss best practices. Teachers work together in incorporating the art of Translanguaging in the classroom through the curriculum and technology. This practice will continue to expand throughout the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 149Q values and respects the parental involvement in the decision-making of their children's education. As a result, our school will use Parent Engagement Tuesdays to discuss student goals and the language progress of individual students with their parents. Teachers will share best practices and ways parents can support their child at home. These meeting will take place throughout the school year through both phone calls, and one on one meetings, and parent workshops. Teachers keep records of when such meetings took place. If a translator is necessary, the school will provide one. Parent Workshops will be provided to parents throughout the year on the goals of all programs. Additionally, parents are provided with an explanation of the state and city standards, the CCLS, core curriculum, GoMath Think Central, assessments, student expectations and general educational program requirements. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 65  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Onalis Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Christa McAuliffe School School DBN: 30Q149 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Onalis Hernanez Title Principal Mayra Ruiz Lotito Assistant Principal Adriana Gil Parent Coordinator Arlene Fernandez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Vera Parent Letty Vaca, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Karen Salinas, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Odalis Fernandez School Counselor Philip Composto n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Maryann Stefatos Other ENL Sara Davila-Hamue Other IEP Teacher Elizabeth DellaBadia Other SETSS Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/20/16 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 06/02/17 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q149 School Name: Christa McAuliffe School Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mayra Adriana Ruiz Lotito Assistant Principal Gil Parent Coordinator No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 149 ensures that all parents in our community are provided with pertinent information at time of registration. Parents receive the information in the language they understand. This service is done through a pedagogue who speaks the parent's language and/or interpretation and translations department. The information indicated in the HLIS is used to determine parent's preferred language for both written and/or oral communication. This information is indicated on ATS as well as on the student's emergency card. The various translated documents provided by the Department of Education are provided to parents in their language of preference. During Parent-Teacher Conferences, parents are provided with interpreters through the Interpretation and Translation Unit as well as in-house staff members. 2018-19 CEP 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Mandarin MossiIaka Tibetan Croatian Polish Bengali English Haitian Creole Arabic Punjabi Burmese Chinese Russian Urdu Spanish Ukrainian 1 0 0 5 1 1 32 485 0 4 1 1 11 1 7 1197 1 0.06% 0 0 0.29% 0.06% 0.06% 1.83% 27.75% 0 0.23% 0.06% 0.06% 0.63% 0.06% 0.4% 68.48% 0.06% 1 2 1 4 1 1 32 485 1 4 1 1 8 1 3 1201 1 0.06% 0.11 0.06% 0.23% 0.06% 0.06% 1.83% 27.75 0.06% 0.23% 0.06% 0.06% 0.46% 0.06% 0.17% 68.71% 0.06% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school provides translated versions of our school handbook, school newsletters, weekly homework assignments, report cards, Newsletters/ Calendars/ Parent Letters are translated in Spanish through in-2018-19 CEP 70  after school information, calendar of events, letters for parents regarding important school information, entitlement letters for ENL services or non entitlement services, AMAO letters, SBST and IEP meetings, etc. In addition, every staff member was presented with an Interpretation and Translation handbook at the start of the school year. They were informed on the important and available translation assistance provided for them. Teachers may utilize this department to have pertinent information such as letters, homework, student progress information, trip information, etc., translated in a parent's preferred language of communication. house staff. As soon as the letters/forms/calendars are created they are translated in Spanish since over 68% of our parents prefer translations in Spanish. Entitlement letters and DOE letters are translated in the parent's preferred language. Once the letters are ready to be distributed they are downloaded in both English and the preferred language upon due date. When holding face to face meetings with parents, the Interpretations and Translations Unit is called and a three way conference call is held. Home Language Identification Letters and Program Selection forms and survey are given to parents in their preferred language to be filled out immediately upon registration of their children. letters informing families of school events such as testing dates, school closures, etc. are provided to parents each month beginning September and/or on the assigned date. Entitlement letters informing parents of their child's ESL status and continuation of services go out the first week of September for those who took the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT / NYSITELL Tests. For those entering the NYC Public School for the first time, the entitlement letters go out within 5 days of taking the test. After school program letters go out at the start of each program usually in the Fall of each new school year. Homework assignments for the week are given to students every Monday. Home Language Identification Survey forms are provided to every parent in their preferred 2018-19 CEP 71  language when they register their children. The NYC Parent Orientation Video is shown to each parent in their preferred language as well. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings During the 2018-2019 school year, parents/caregivers will be offered parent workshops during parent engagement Tuesdays. Individual meetings pertaining to student's progress will also be held by classroom teachers, cluster teachers, and/or guidance and SBST Department during parent engagement Tuesdays, and/or during the school day. Middle School parent information will be offered to parents by the Guidance Counselors during the school day. Open school week/parent orientations will take place in the months of September/October for each grade. Teachers will provide parents with an overview of the year's curriculum and expectations. There will be a Parent Kindergarten Orientation on September 9th for incoming parents of Kindergarten students. During the month of June 2018, there will be an orientation for incoming third grade students from PS 228 and PS222. A . Kindergarten Orientation will also take place in June 2018. The Attendance Teacher will be provided with names of chronically absent/late students so that a home visits will take place. In addition, teachers are communicating with parents of ELL students to inform them of their progress as mandated by CR Part 154. These meetings will take place during parent engagement Tuesdays or during a teacher's planning time. Parent Teachers Conferences taking place in November 2018 and March 2019 will be sent home two weeks prior. Parents will receive the calendar in September with important school meetings throughout the year. Monthly calendars reminding parents of school events such as Open How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Many of the staff at PS149Q are bilingual. They speak and write in both English and Spanish. This includes the administration, teachers, school aides, paraprofessionals, nurse, and out of classroom support staff. Parents are always given the choice to communicate in Spanish if that is their preference. 2018-19 CEP 72  IEP letters go home to parents informing them of their visit with the school staff working with their child. House, PTA monthly meetings, trips, school closures, etc, will go home on a monthly basis. IEP letters informing parents of their scheduled meetings go home in the parent's preferred language. The Spanish letters are automatically created. Languages other than Spanish and/or English are created in Google Chrome Translated Version and this comment is noted on the IEP. The Interpretation and Translations Unit is used over the course of the year such as when having face to face to face meetings and during phone calls to the parents to discuss student progress. During Parent Teachers Conferences, substitute teachers are hired to translate in other languages such as Bengali. They meet with the staff working with the students and the parents/caregivers. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our communication strategy in the cases of an emergency, is to contact the parent immediately. Since the majority of our parents are Spanish speakers, there is always someone available to communicate with them in Spanish. We also have several staff members who speak another language other than English and Spanish. They will be utilized if the particular language they speak is needed for communication. Many parents come to us with a member of the family or friend who speaks English. Usually the parents add their names to the emergency card and we will communicate with them if am emergency arises and the parent speaks no English. In addition, we will contact the Interpretations and Translations Unit if the above was not successful. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members were given a spiral bound book with information on the Translations and Interpretations Unit and the services they offer. The Assistant Principal has posted new numbers as well as translated documents services on the school's website. Many of our teachers currently are using these services. In addition, CR A-663 will be given to teachers during the first week of school in September 2018. This regulation will be revised as per the handbook.. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 149Q will continue to provide Translation and Interpretation Services and information as needed at all meetings and school events. The availability of these services will be communicated to parents through Chancellor's Regulations A-663, as well as visibly, posted signs throughout the school. Our school will continue to be kept well informed of any changes and additions to the translations and interpretations services as well as provide parents/care givers, and staff members with any information on these changes at meetings and through written correspondences. Parents in need of interpreters will be offered the opportunity to have one through telephone conferences with the Interpretation and Translations Unit or with a staff member who speaks the language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 149Q will provide a parent survey and a needs assessment survey to ensure that parents and caregivers have received the availability of services they require. During PTA meetings, parents will be reminded of such services available to them as well as when meeting with teachers, and other school personnel. 2018-19 CEP 74 
