2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q152 School Name: Q152 - P.S. 152 GWENDOLINE N. ALLEYNE SCHOOL Principal: VINCENT VITOLO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: THE GWENDOLINE N. ALLEYNE SCHOOL, P.S. 152Q. 34300000152 PRE K - Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 30Q152 33-52 62 nd Street, Woodside New York 11377 718 429-3141 718 779-7532 Phone Number: Fax: Enid Maldonado-Salgado emaldon3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Vincent J. Vitolo Ronit Lopez Choeying Tashishar Elizabeth Economakos SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: ChoeyingTashishar N/A N/A TiahMoe District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Northern Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vincent J. Vitolo Ronit Lopez ChoeyingTashishar Donna Hillegass Nahmina Choudhury N/A N/A Tiah Moe Elizabeth Economakos Enid Maldonado-Salgado Soula Stathidis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Administration/ Chairperson Administration/ All Grades Teacher/ Teacher Grades 4-6 2018-19 CEP 5  Name KeslyCoba Christine Connors SalinaAkter Ayha Ahmed Syeda Farah Deeba Grace Villalba ThaminaJahan DaliaChowdhury Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Teacher/ Teacher Grade 2-3 / OTPs Teacher/ Teacher Grade Pre K - 2 Parent/ Early Childhood Parent/ Upper Elemenatry Parent/ AIS Parent / Special Education Parent/ ESL Parent/ Early Childhood Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: CEP Overview We at P.S. 152Q. are committed to providing a student-centered educational environment that enables each student to reach the highest standard of academic rigor and excellence. We will provide a safe, nurturing, diverse, collaborative, and challenging environment in which optimal learning can take place and children can experience the highest level of academic success. Through the collaborative efforts of parents, teachers, administrators, students, and community we will support and promote the intellectual, social, emotional, and physical growth and development of 2018-19 CEP 9  each child ensuring our commitment to college and career readiness for all learners. We are a community of lifelong learners where the unique talents and abilities of our students generate a valued identity, positive attitudes, and respect for all. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We view our school as a community whose members are committed to creating a safe, respectful, collaborative climate in which educational and cultural opportunities provide rich, creative, and diverse experiences for all learners. Within this environment, learners can build a foundation of knowledge with strong academic, technological, artistic, flexible, and practical life skills to realize success and fulfillment. Ultimately, these learners will develop the critical thinking skills, problem solving abilities, college and career readiness skills, social intelligence, organizational, and communicative skills needed to solidify their options as family members, professionals, and citizens. Composition P.S. 152 is composed of students from Central and South America, the Middle East, Asia, and the Caribbean. The latest data shows that the ethnic composition of our student population is comprised in its majority of Hispanic and Asian or Pacific Islanders. Presently an excess of 30 percent of our students are former or currently English Language Language Learners (FELLs / ELLs). The diversity of the languages spoken in the homes of our children includes Spanish, Hindi, Punjabi, Chinese, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, and Tibetin. Since our school is frequently the first stop in the journey of many of our parents, our population is mobile, yet our attendance continues to be high. Collaborations, Partnerships, and Initiatives: Authors and Illustrators Magnet School We host an annual week-long Authors and Illustrators Expo (with a variety of engaging activities including an author’s visit) to celebrate magnet work created throughout the year. Project Arts: All students from Grades K - 5 further their understanding of curricular content through the arts, culminating in a final production organized collaboratively across grades. Students engage in performing arts, drumming, Islamic Arts, origami, architecture, journalism, graphic arts, photography, and theater productions through our partnership with Marquis Studios. Parents, family members, siblings, and other classes are invited to the various Project Arts events. P.S. 152 continues to be a showcase school for Marquis Studios by hosting potential and current funders for the Arts and guest observers for potential agreements with Marquis Studios that will bring varied modalities of the Arts to our classrooms for the enrichment of our children and community.. Ballroom Dancing : Our fifth graders engage in ballroom dancing instruction to heighten poise, confidence, respect for self, and presentation abilities. The partner organization, Dancing Classrooms transforms previously disaffected girls and boys into mature, self-reliant, highly motivated, elegant young ladies and gentlemen who are successful team players. In a short period of time, the program transforms the grade 5 classrooms into supportive, learning-enhancing environments based on mutual respect, courtesy, and cross-cultural understanding. Skilled dancers are chosen to form a team, which competes across the city and performs at a variety of venues in the community. PENCIL: Through our partnership with Scholastic News, we receive complimentary weekly student magazines and our students have had the opportunity to be published and interviewed for the magazine. Our teachers and students 2018-19 CEP 10  learn first hand to provide feedback and critique sources of information in a professional forum by relating to one of the editors of the magazine. School-Wide Enrichment Model: Through the Renzulli School-wide Enrichment Program, students in grades four through six select interest-based clusters, which meet for two periods each week for one semester. COMPASS/CBO-Woodside-On-The-Move Through a partnership with a community-based organization, we have established an after-school tutoring and recreation program from 2:30 pm to 5:30 pm during the school year and a Summer Camp during July and August for Grades K - 5. Additionally, Woodside-On-The-Move offers Adult ESL Classes, Judo, Computer Classes, etc. to community. The above information is shared by Woodside-On-The Move’s main office staff at an information and sign-up booth during the Fall and Spring Parent-Teacher Conferences. Respect-For-All Award School (2013, 2015, 2016): The New York City Department of Education named P.S. 152Q as a Respect-For-All Award School in 2013 and 2015. Technology Initiatives : The 2018 – 2019 school year will include an innovative phase of college and career readiness by continuing the work in Google Docs and adding a one to one computer roll-out that will allow teachers to foster writing with real world purpose and enhance content instruction while fostering higher levels of comprehension of non fiction text. The Technology and Media department will continue their work with Quick response (QR) codes with extended learning. Teachers will continue their learning and share best practices using iTunes U. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In addition to our population of ELLs and FELLs, P.S. 152 also provides for the needs of a varied group of Students with Disabilities in flexible programs including Integrated Co-teaching (ICT), self-contained 12:1:1, and related services. Language learning and meeting the needs of students with disabilities is an evolving process that P.S. 152 fully embraces and works toward improving each year through professional learning, inquiry team analysis of best practices, and the study of successful models. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools: Successes: Effective School Leadership –fostering professional growth and enabling teacher leadership is a clear feature of this administration. The teachers of this school are empowered to make suggestions that impact on instruction and the curriculum. Their professional input is valued, respected, and appreciated. Professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement has been at the heart of all of the learning endeavors for years. The leaders foster teacher teams who collaborate for change. Professional Learning Community periods have been a priority of the administration for many years and something the Principal worked into the daily schedule four days per week for 50 minutes prior to the advent of the Monday sessions because of the value leadership sees in teacher empowerment. Collaborative Teachers – the initial part of this aspect of the framework holds great success in P.S. 152. Through Inquiry our teachers have collaborated in teams that have impacted on teaching at a variety of levels. Teacher collaboration can be seen through inter-visitation when sharing best practices, in the launching of innovative techniques as was the school wide launch of Smart Response as a formative assessment capturing tool, in grade planning to decide on a grading policy and assessment rubrics, and in partnering experienced teachers with new 2018-19 CEP 11  teachers joining the school community. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and the school. Supportive Environment : The data shows that P.S. 152 has a very low incidence rate. Students are supported by an Assistant Principal that moves with them from grade to grade. These leaders know the children and relate to them and their families. Teachers maintain ongoing dialogue and are always accessible to children. Key Area of Focus: Rigorous Instruction –Currently we have had success in matching instruction to the CCLS to ensure instruction is customized, inclusive, and motivating. High standards are set in classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. However, the cohesion of this element across all classrooms is not equitable and forces us to revisit the pedagogy and explore venues by which to solidify the practices across all classrooms at an analogous level. Although we have made some gains in the area of instructional cohesion across the grade, the level of involvement continues to be a challenge that we will need to address in the 2018 - 2019 school year. Collaborative Teachers –While the school has experience huge success in building a collaborative community of educators, we will continue to look at how this element can support the work needed to increase rigorous instruction. Teachers will be collaborating on a best practices collection to add to iTunes University courses as well as adding to the process and use of Google Docs. Strong Family-Community Ties –P.S. 152Q firmly believes that an enlightened knowledgeable parent is the difference between a child that feels supported and the one that struggles with learning. Parents can only feel welcome when they know that they have something to offer to the system that at times may seem foreign to them. This is especially true of the parent that does not understand the language of the school or the system of instruction. Partnerships with families will be fostered through links to learning in various sources explored throughout the year. Cultural beliefs and other restrictions such as language will be addressed as well. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q152 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1104 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 33 49 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 49 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 73.6% % Reduced Lunch 31.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 40.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.42 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 104 109 49 96.2% 0.9% 11.1% 0.4% 54.4% 1.4% 6 0% 7.5 62.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths:  The teachers are combining questioning and technology through the use of SMART Response and "Plicker". This practice leads to high student engagement for all learners. The product of this practice leads to data results that then are analyzed and used for specifically driven instruction.  The use of varied levels of questions allows for multilevel discussion amongst learners.  Essential questions are used with more regularity as a form of inquiry to launch a lesson and later to a degree to measure student learning.  The school assures that common assessments are aligned to instructional goals by looking at summative assessments. They represent the culmination of units of study/chapters as scored against a grade-wide rubric.  The school uses common assessments to determine student progress via the review of data collected from formative and summative assessments to track and maintain student growth. Collected data drives the leveling of students for instructional purposes.  Classroom teachers maintains active ongoing communication with parents through "Class DoJo" ensure that parents have the most recent information and that parents have the opportunity to contact teachers when necessary.  The administration ensures that teachers effectively adjust curriculum and instruction based on common assessment results that are collected and reviewed three times per year. Supervisors review teacher plans and student work.  Teachers are providing students with an understanding of what they are doing well through descriptive feedback that links to classroom learning, and gives specific input on how to reach the next step in the learning progression.  The focus on Literacy in the early childhood grades K - 2 has shifted to include teaching developmental reading in Centers. The goal in 2017-2018 was to increase the teacher to student interaction in small group. Students are currently averaging an additional 30 to 45 minutes of direct instruction in small group at a Teacher station per week than was the norm in the 2016-2017 school year. This work will continue in the 2018-19 school year with the advantage of solid structures that the students have now mastered after participating in a full year of this method of literacy instruction. Needs: Student performance data (tasks, iReady diagnostic, student writing samples) continue to show weakness in performance linked to instructional gaps. While mastery of content, rigor, and English Language Arts performance has increased, the increase can be seen among students or average to above average ability levels. English language learners (Ells), students with disabilities (SWD), and low performing general education students though making 2018-19 CEP 14  progress are not maintaining the same pace as the children in the higher group when analyzing progress data. Data gathered from iReady diagnostic and currently running records (June 2018) show an increase in the percentage of readers that are meeting the grade level expectations of the Next Generation Learning Standards, however, we continue to seek alternatives for learners who are outside of that scope of success. Quality teachers embrace life-long learning, teach with commitment, and are reflective upon their teaching practice . They teach subject matter and the learning process through good communication, diagnostic skills, understanding of different learning styles and cultural influences, knowledge about child development, and the ability to vary instructional techniques to meet the needs of the children they teach. They set high expectations and support students in achieving them. In order to ensure that learners are truly learning what is being taught our teachers must take a closer look at how students are managing the new knowledge. In order to genuinely know that and act upon it, a teacher must understand formative assessment and its interactive or cyclical nature. At the classroom level, for example, teachers should collect information about a student's learning, make corresponding adjustments in their instruction, and continue to collect information. Formative assessment can result in significant learning gains but only when the assessment results are used to inform the instructional and learning process. Recent data is showing that our teachers are falling short at sustaining this process. The use of generic checklists are capturing certain behaviors but not informing the instruction as needed to make adjustments to meet the needs of learners. Disaggregated ELA data highlighting students with disabilities in Grade 3 to 5 showed that 10.0 percent of the SWD tested were found to be performing at or above levels 3. Although this was an increase from the performance noted in the 2016 outcomes where only 6.0 percent were performing at or above level 3, the data continues to show that a large percentage of the learners in this subgroup (90.0%) are performing at or below Level 2. The trends in the 2017 data show a 5.0 percent increase in students performing at level 1 and 9.0 percent decrease in those at level 2. Given the languages other than English spoken by the parents in the school community, improving student outcomes in literacy will need to include parent engagement activities that foster language development and literacy in the new language. It has been noted that children who work with their parents on daily reading activities, questioning/ discussion exercises, as well as language building interactive activities, increase fluency, language use, and experience a shorter leveled reading progression than those who work independently and manage literacy assignments on their own. Therefore training parents on building supports for their children and how to assist their child's teacher in enhancing student performance are also priorities that will need to continue in the 2018-19 school year. Varied sources including Advance and TeachBoost show a weakness in the outcomes of data collection as well as the use of several tools as these pertain to the impact on instruction. When the tools being used do not provide the most accurate data, the results are marred and may mask weaknesses that go undetected or ignored. This weakness impacts on student results and is reflected in the formal and informal observations conducted by supervisors during the 2017 – 2018 school year. School year data from formal and informal observation sources (New York City Advance and "TeachBoost") showed that: ● In Component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction, with eliciting evidence of student understanding, providing timely, constructive, and substantive feedback that provides students the guidance they need to improve their performance, and where students monitor their own learning and take appropriate action, teachers of the early grade (K – 2) classes averaged 3.02 while teachers of the upper elementary grades 3 to 6 showed an average score of 3.26. Priority:     Increase teacher ability across all grades to develop meaningful formative assessment that captures learning. Increase teacher ability to use the data that emanates for well-designed checklists and other formative assessment to adjust instruction in a way that addresses the needs of the students reducing intervals that affect student understanding Increase student ability to self assess and be reflective of their own learning. Increase teacher ability to assess the performance in all levels and conduct prescriptive intervention that meets their needs in ELA. 2018-19 CEP 15   Prepare parents in literacy and language by providing engagement activities that foster their understanding of themselves as readers, speakers or a new language, and how to conduct reading discussion through questioning and discussion with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades K to 5 will be immersed in literacy in their everyday environment resulting in a 3% increase in the number of students who are reading at or above grade level as measured by the school wide Fountas and Pinnell level based running records 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The literacy block for students in K-2 will continue to follow a center model of learning including two Guided Reading sessions. Centers will include: Book Nook for Reading Comprehension, Word Work – highlighting concepts taught within Fundations, Writing – highlighting concepts taught within Fundamentals of Writing program, Technology and/or Listening Center. Professional Learning will center around the theme of increasing coherence within centers across grade levels. Teachers will collaborate to streamline center work with an emphasis on meeting the specific behaviors related to the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels. Classroom Teachers of students in Grades K – 5 Administration September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principals In order to build upon the center model of learning that was followed in second grade, students in Grade 3 will transition to a station model of literacy instruction. Stations will include topics related to test sophistication highlighting each Hallmark within the Advanced Literacy Framework. Students in Grades 4 and 5 will continue to follow a station model of learning during Literacy instruction. The Advanced Literacies Committee will continue to examine the existing curriculum with the focus of strengthening the instructional core through ensuring the integrity of coherent instruction during PLC sessions. The teachers of English Language Learners will ensure that learning targets sustain the focus on language development as well as literacy including scaffolding for each target in accordance with language proficiency levels. (Monday Professional Development Sessions) September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Advanced Literacy Committee members composed of STL Teachers, Grade representatives, and Assistant Principals Administration Grade Level Representatives K-5 IEP teacher ESL Coordinator Cluster Teacher RepresentativeSeptember 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 CEP 17  Teachers of Students with Disabilities will use Individual Education Plan goals and modified criteria elements in mapping out the learning targets to ensure success and proper path toward progress monitoring. (daily planning) Teachers and Students K to 2 Lab sites for K-2 teachers for observing and sharing best practices of advanced literacy instruction will continue with a focus of designing coherent instruction with an emphasis on meeting the needs of all learners. (Engaging Texts, Rich Discussion, Daily Writing and High Utility Vocabulary Words) Students Grades K – 2 In order to ensure lasting impact on instruction and continuous rigor, students at risk of not meeting promotional standards and English Language learners will participate in an After school or Saturday Academy program. Ells will engage in a supplemental program to sustain learning targets based on language development and at risk students will participate in a Title I program that will aid in reducing learning gaps by teaching through hands on structured lessons, reflections on reading, and additional strategies that support learning targets in literacy. (Afterschool: Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:30 PM to 5:00 PM from October 19, 2017 to June 2, 2018; Saturday Academy: 8:00 AM to 12:00 PM from January 3, 2018 to June 3, 2018) Teachers Grades K -5 GE, Former ELLs, and SWDs September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers (K - 2) Assistant Principals, Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:30 PM to 5:00 PM from October 2018 to June 2019; Saturday Academy: 8:00 AM to 12:00 PM from January 2019 to June 2019 Teachers, Supervisor (per session) 2018-19 CEP 18  The teachers of English Language Learners will ensure that learning targets sustain the focus on language development as well as literacy including scaffolding for each target in accordance with language proficiency levels. (Tuesday Professional work sessions once per month) The school will conduct a targeted intervention program for Students with Disabilities (SWD) in literacy during the instructional day. The intervention Special Education teachers will provide a fifty minute guided reading and advance comprehension with word attack and skills with a focus on fluency and reading skills (behaviors) two periods per week. Teachers will monitor for progress as students interact with text, read, and use reading strategies in order to modify and adjust instruction sustaining a consistent model of demonstrate, observe, assess / give feedback, adjust. Gradual release of the learner will happen progressively as the student demonstrates the ability to self correct and use the techniques with independence or minimal prompting. Intervention for learners with reading disabilities will be based on the "Orton Gullingham" Approach Teachers of ENL, Bilingual students in Grades K - 5 October 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Assistant Principals SWDs that scored between 1.88 and 2.12; and 2,67 and 3.12 on the 2018 NYS ELA test ENL and Bilingual Teachers Special Education Teachers Assistant principals Paraprofessionals IEP Teacher 2018-19 CEP 19  Teachers and students will participate in the CUNY Creative Arts Team Program. (CAT) The purpose of this program is to improve higher order reading skills in the early grades through a combination of professional development and in class modeling and collaboration between school educators and professional teaching artists funded by Brooke Astor Fund for NYC Education. (Year 2 Renewal: 5 in class residency sessions and 5 onsite professional development sessions on Mondays) Students Grades K – 2 September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers (K - 2) Assistant Principals, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 20  September "Meet the Teacher" and October during Tuesday sessions: Parents will attend literacy building sessions conducted by a teacher with the purpose of understanding the component skills they need to read through level appropriate text in English. The teacher will focus on strategies that can be used at home as well as address the skills/strategies that are taught to children in school. (A series of parent engagement sessions) -Assistant Principal Throughout the Year beginning in October 2018: Parent members on the School Leadership Team who have worked toward developing the goals and action plan in this document will share the initiatives on this and each of th goals with the parents of this community. They will share  Share program information related to parent programs, meetings, and other activities in a format and language that parents can understand;  The school will coordinate with parent members to ensure that all parents have a copy and are aware of the Parent Involvement Policy.  Parent members will attend Parent Association share information regarding the schoolwide goal of rigor in literacy and the action plan set forth to achieve the goal. Follow-up sessions for parents will be conducted on how to ask questions, discuss text, access prior knowledge, and ask their children to prove their responses with evidence from the text. (A series of parent engagement sessions.) -Teachers Monthly: As teachers launch an instructional unit, parents will receive the learning target statements for upcoming lessons written in "parent friendly" format will a brief blurb on the purpose of the unit. Tuesday afternoon sessions once per month will be used to welcome parents for discussion on the learning target goals and provide exemplars that parents can follow to extend the learning at home. Teachers will provide parents with questions that they can ask about the expected outcomes and samples of responses that demonstrate each level of understanding as well as what to do to elevate student interpretation and skills. Through student lead conferences parents will learn how to focus their understanding of what a child is able to verbalize consistent with what they are learning and how they are learning it so that these conversations may continue at home. Additionally, new language development classes will continue in series to prepare parents in the use of the new language and how to support their child who is learning English. -Parent Coordinator November 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom Teachers of Grades K – 5, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Professional Learning Community sessions (period 7) pending funding availability, Professional Library (titles pending), and: 2018-19 CEP 21   Per session hours for teachers who will be planning for and delivery Parent engagement sessions.  Per session hours for teachers to work the After school and Saturday Academy hours  Per session hours for a supervisor to organize and oversee the program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in grades K to 2 will have participated and been immersed in literacy in their everyday environment resulting in a 1.5% increase in the number of students who are reading at or above grade level as measured by the school wide Fountas and Pinnell level based running records. Baseline: 31.2% of the readers at or above grade reading level. (all students) Midpoint Benchmark (February 2019): 32.7% at or above grade reading levels (all students) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School Level Measure of Teacher Performance Summary Report (Advance) TeachBoost -All Scores and Ratings Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  Exceeded targets in attendance (97.5%).  School Quality Snapshot (Teachers) –Above the City and District average in Supportive Environment (88% compared to 83% for the City and 86% District) -100 percent of teachers consider students to be safe in the building (City 95%); 81% of teachers reported that adults in the school teach students to advocate for themselves (86% City); 100% of the teachers considered that it is important to come to school each day (96% City); 88% of the parents reported that the school offers a wide range of programs to keep children interested in school.  NYC School Survey (Students): 84% strongly agreed teachers expected them to work hard; 79% felt teachers  expected them to do their best; 67% strongly agreed felt their teachers expected them to be better thinkers. Supportive Environment Summary of Section Ratings (Framework for Great Schools) shows that P.S. 152 is exceeding Target at 4.36 (Highest possible score 4.99).  Extended participation of students during spirit days and school wide events: school performances, ballroom dancing, Authors and Illustrators’ Expo, Author visit. Low suspension rate  Weaknesses:  3% chronically absent students.  Content: Math skills weakness noted in the interpretation of operations and algebraic thinking. Grade 3.  Noted in observed performance is the difficulty of mastering the Mathematics standards due to lack of content language and confidence with the skills required to solve problems in each strand. Priority Needs: Focus on creating a community of learners that see the strengths in collaboration and peer engagement.   Transform aspects of the instructional day where students are working as a collaborating body on common  goals. Increase fluidity, fluency, flexibility, and application of math strategies and boosting communal math confidence in the lower elementary grades we will impact on the outcomes and performance in the upper elementary grades.  Create an environment and culture where excellence and hard work has intrinsic and extrinsic reward attainable by all learners independent of academic level, language proficiency, special needs classification.  Change the outlook of students who do not feel challenged and those who feel they are unable to meet expectations to one in which all children feel that they can experience success at it highest form. 2018-19 CEP 23   Improve motivation, time on task, and retention in mathematics by developing a common culture that supports problem solving that increases discussion, justification, explanation, varied thinking, multiple methods of solution, and automaticity will continue as a focus for next year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018 - 2019 school year, Students in grades K to 5 will construct a common culture that celebrates excellence by fostering interaction with peers in Mathematics resulting in a 3% increase in the number of children scoring at or above level 3 on the 2019 New York State Mathematics Test. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A committee composed of one administrator and one teacher representative from each grade will come together monthly with the purpose of planning activities that will engage students in varied events highlighting Math throughout the school year. (Math Month, Math Olympics, Fact Challenges, Math Spirit) All students Grades K - 5 September 2018 to May 2019 Grade leaders, Assistant Principals, student counsel leaders. Students will engage in the process of developing clear expectations with teachers, administrators, and parents where they will set benchmarks that target each strand of mathematics on a continuum. Each grade will have a specific target aligned with the New York State Mathematics Next Generation Learning Standards identified as a weakness for the grade. Students and teacher will collaborate (monthly) to set goals in building and sustaining automaticity that will impact on the weakness areas identified for the grade. (Team meetings PLC October - May) Professional learning cycles will include a focus on how to improve automaticity and fluency in math where teachers will collaborate to create activities and share techniques and resources that work for varied populations of learners. (Two out of three sessions during Professional Learning Community (PLC) 50 minute day school sessions to work with Lead teachers per grade and 2 sessions during professional learning Mondays for Lead teachers to disseminate and work collaboratively with teachers in the grade) Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parents Grade K - 5 Teachers October 2018 to June 2019 Professional Learning Team (Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers) Collaborating Teachers (Grades K – 5) Lab Site Personnel SWD Teachers, Assistant Principal supervising Special Education Teachers of Students with Disabilities (SWD) will collaborate within the department to develop strategies that increase self-efficacy and positive attitude that can impact on the confidence with which SWDs approach the content. These will include a form of competitive games, Project / Challenge based application of math, and adult coaching in addition to other research based techniques the teachers develop as part of ongoing inquiry. (monthly Professional Learning Mondays for a total of 8 sessions) SWDs in Grades K - 5 October 2018 to February 2019 2018-19 CEP 25  Teachers of English Language learners will sustain a focus building community and confidence by highlighting targeted goals and celebrating class benchmarks. Students, teachers, and administrators will work toward setting targets the highlight content vocabulary, common math language, problem solving through everyday experiences, using math skills to solve a daily challenge or simulation. Teachers will work with the Assistant Principal supervising ENL programs to develop varied team building math experiences for learners. (biweekly celebrations; monthly professional learning teacher and AP conversations and discussion) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November 2018 to March 2019 Teachers of ELLs, Assistant Principal supervising TESOL, English Language Learners ELLs) grades K-5 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Teachers will inform families via "DoJo" messaging or written newsletters of the events. While the events are unfolding in the classroom, teachers will maintain parents informed on their child's role in preparing for events that test automaticity. Thereafter classroom-, grade, and school-wide events will be announced to parents via invitations, parent calendars, and announcements inviting them to attend events at the school.  Survey parents to establish the interest and academic needs of their children so that teachers can serve as resources in Grades K to 2 and 3 to 5 sharing their knowledge, talents, and skills with the children.  Parents will collaborate with their children on two STEM projects that will be shared in the classroom. Parent and child will work on the projects together. During the celebration, parents will join their child in the classroom to share their project. Students and parents will vote for projects choosing two that will represent the class. A grade wide event will follow recognizing the work of parent-child teams. November 2018 to March 2019 SLT Parent Representatives Assistant Principals, Classroom Teachers Parent Coordinator (oversee) 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 Principal, 3 Assistant Principals, 53 Classroom Teachers, books, charts, technology equipment; and:  Committee hours for planning collaborative Team events  Materials / incentive / rewards for Team events  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students in Grades K to 5 will have increased performance in Math (number sense and operations) given the collaborative automaticity activities / events resulting in a 1.5% increase in students reaching the Mid Grade Level or Above in the domain of number sense and operations as measured by the iReady Diagnostics Test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady –Math (Curriculum Associates) Participation Exit tickets / feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Data sources noted in the 2016-17 and 2017-18 Teacher Level Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Detail Report and the 2017-18 School level MOTP Report show that across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best. Practices are driven by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and the instructional shifts. Our school community believes that students learn best when they are highly engaged in rigorous instruction, which allows for multiple entry points for all learners. Common pedagogical approaches and strategies that are evident across classrooms include, but are not limited to:  Clear instructional outcomes (learning targets) that are set in order to develop essential questions.  Lessons that are differentiated through the inclusion of tiered work, as well as, expectations for student performance. Lessons with a shift in focus from textbook generated to Standard and curriculum based.   Pedagogical shift from Textbook centered instruction to teacher led gradual release model ("I do", "We do",   "You do"). Flexible grouping that is used based on formative assessments (Review of Teacher Reports -NYC Advance). Small group instruction, strategically planned around intervention, stations, and learning centers (Administrative observations note the shift). Outcomes noted in the 2018 English Language Arts test disaggregated data sorted by teacher allowed for further interpretation of how instruction noted in the MOTP reports impacted on student performance. Trends noted that weaknesses in the teacher performance in 1e and 3c of the Framework had a correlation with how learners performed in 2017 ELA. This trends continued into this last assessment. Given the instructional shifts established in the 2017 - 18 school year, impact may not be evident in the Standardized data in the 2018 outcomes since the Grade K to 2 centers based approach to teaching was established in the non standardized testing grades. However, the proliferation of station based instruction in grade 4 (year 2) and grade 5 (year 1) will be scrutinized using the 2018 ELA and Mathematics data. 2. Strengths:  As a learning community, teachers have embraced the professional learning model previously a part of the instructional day through 7 th period Professional Learning Community, 50-minute blocks and the Monday and Tuesday extended time.  Teacher led Data Inquiry Team cycles yield systemic change that impacts on delivery of instruction, curriculum decisions, and unit variations that increase rigor for all learners independent of subgroup. Instructional resources are aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards.   Technology use has expanded across grades changing the delivery of instruction and the method of learning. Students are empowered through varied tools that motivate and increase access to real world experiences. 2018-19 CEP 28   Through the use of questioning, some teachers facilitate classroom discussions and create opportunities for higher order thinking. For example, teachers pose different levels of questions to meet the needs of all learners.  Pedagogical shifts in Grades K - 2 to learning centers for literacy instruction; Grade 4 and Grade 5 station based instruction in ELA, and a school-wide shift to gradual release methods of teaching Mathematics have impacted on how teachers are reducing the teacher to student ratio increasing targeted and student based instruction. Priority Areas:  Increase cohesion across the school ensuring balanced teacher performance in planning coherent rigorous instruction (Noted in a summary of Items 1e and 3c of the MOTP)  Minimize the gap between early childhood and upper elementary pedagogical techniques that ensure rigor of instruction including, but not limited to questioning and discussion, and active engagement. (Diagnostic Tool Self-reflection)  Build upon the center-based model of learning that was followed in second grade, there is a need to transition third graders to a station based model of literacy instruction.  Building student empowerment and self monitoring.  Preparing teachers on how to strategically provide scaffolding before, during, and after reading and in preparation for writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades K to 5 will be immersed in an educator collaborative instructional model with a focus on academic language and discourse resulting in a 3% increase in the overall student performance in English Language Arts as measured by Fountas and Pinnell levels based running records 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Building upon last year’s “Word of the Week” protocol to address Hallmark #4, High Utility Vocabulary Words, teachers will continue to incorporate strategies from the “Word Work and Word Play” Guide within all content area lessons. Teacher teams will collaborate to spotlight specific protocols including but not limited to the “Shades of Meaning” strategy. October 2018 – June 2019 Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL Teachers will be organized in teams across grade levels to share best practices. In order to ensure that practices are shared based on meeting the needs of the different population of students, teachers of English Language Learners (ELL) and Students With Disabilities (SWD) will be paired with each other within the same cohort. The purpose of the collaboration will be to gain an understanding of academic language, and design opportunities to promote academic discourse in the classroom. Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL October 2018 – June 2019 (Cohort A: K-2 teachers; Cohort B: 3-5 teachers) Teachers will meet monthly in their cohorts to share findings, brainstorm strategies and adjust instruction as needed. Sessions will be held on Mondays for a minimum of 50 minutes. Topics for sessions will include but are not limited to: Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education October 2018 – June 2019  Study of meaning/ purpose of academic language and discourse. (What is academic language? How can we promote discourse?)  Review of upcoming thematic units of study to determine the necessary academic vocabulary terms students should be familiar with. Identify ways to plan for explicit instruction of academic vocabulary and discourse.   Plan learning activities that provide opportunities for students to process and apply academic vocabulary and skills of academic discourse. (Discussion rubrics for content area conversations. Grade-wide protocols including sentence starters and question prompts. For Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL Assistant Principals Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL Assistant Principals Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL Assistant Principals 2018-19 CEP 30 Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL November 2018 – June 2019 Teachers of Grades K – 5 General Education, Special Education, Bilingual, ENL Assistant Principals coherence, Rubrics and protocols will be created on a continuum that will be shared both vertically and horizontally across grade levels.)  Developing ideas, sharing methods and preparing interactive center / station activities.  Research and share ideas on scaffolding for learners that is pre planned and based on the known weaknesses and learning styles / strengths of students. Design formative and summative assessments with specific criteria for academic vocabulary and discourse within each thematic unit. (Design rubrics / checklists as tools for monitoring the inclusion of academic terms within conversations.) Collaborating Teachers will participate in professional learning sessions spearheaded by the grade administrators that supervise the partnered teachers and teacher teams to share research and literature on varied topic of child development and rigorous task development and cohesive instructional models, launch ideas for inquiry, and other topics that stem from the interaction between partnerships. The team will work on streamlining data sources to ensure that the tools used are necessary and that they yield the information necessary to make decisions on student progress to improving reading Collaborating Teachers of ELLs and SWDs will work in cohorts by department as well as by grades to share best practices that have emerged from Inquiry based investigations and proven to be successful with these populations. Teachers of ENL and those working with SWDs will enhance their understanding of how to plan together for Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) that is specific to the needs. A Team of Special education Teachers will continue on Inquiry around the impact of teaching reading and writing for struggling readers and non readers using the Orthon Gullingham approach attending Professional learning sessions and sharing implementation while also tracking student progress for impact. 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Literacy sessions for parents will include ideas derived for teacher collaboration and discussion. The teachers training parents will teach parents how to track reading accuracy, how to promote reading stamina at home, and how to guide their child in reading with fluency through text repetition and pre reading exercises. (3 - 4 lessons) Teachers will organize sessions with parents to share strategies for building academic vocabulary into conversations with their children. (Tuesday sessions.) December 2018 – March 2019 Saturday school supervisor, Per session teachers, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers (Grade K to 5), Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Professional Learning Community period 7 (subject to funding), Professional books and articles. Technology equipment, curriculum timeline, teachers’ editions of the school wide literacy program, and:  Teacher per session to provide parent training sessions.  Supervisor per session to review training sessions, provide feedback and oversee the parent engagement sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the average score for teachers in the K to 2 group will have increased from 2.68 to 2.85 reducing the gap between the performance of Early Childhood grade teachers and Upper Elementary by 0.17 as measured by informal observation scores derived from the Danielson Framework rubric (Component 1e). 2018-19 CEP 32  By February 2019, the average score for teachers in the K to 2 group will have increased from 2.50 to 2.65 reducing the gap between the performance of Early Childhood grade teachers and Upper Elementary by 0.26 as measured by informal observation scores derived from the Danielson Framework rubric (Component 3b).. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady –Reading (Curriculum Associates) NYC Advance MOTP Reports TeachBoost Fountas and Pinnel running records Agendas and signing sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the data in Advance pertaining to teacher performance in the Domains of 1e, 3b and 3d nd professional learning series conducted in the 2016 – 2017 school year the following items were noted. Strengths:  76% of observations completed rated teachers as Effective or Highly Effective in the domain of 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction. Teachers had an average score of 2.85.  68% of observations completed rated teachers as Effective or Highly Effective in the domain of 3b. Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Teachers had an average score of 2.3.  71% of observations completed rated teachers as Effective or Highly Effective in the domain of 3d. Using Assessment in Instruction. Teachers had an average score of 2.8.  Teachers that have an overall rating of Effective or Highly Effective in the Domains of 1e, 3b and 3d have been identified as a resource for other teachers seeking to improve their practices within those domains. Weaknesses:  24% of observations completed rated teachers as Developing in the domain of 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction.  32% of observations completed rated teachers as Developing in the domain of 3b. Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques.  29% of observations completed rated teachers as Developing in the domain of 3d. Using Assessment in Instruction.  Weaknesses noted in administrative recommendations repeat as weaknesses in 18 percent of the staff reflecting a lack of knowledge as to how to modify the pedagogical limitation. Priorities:  Professional learning sessions targeting weaknesses in planning and delivery of instruction are not meeting the expected mark in the application and execution process denoting a need for further coaching once the training series has taken place. 2018-19 CEP 34   There is a need to extend learning opportunities beyond sessions conducted during the Monday professional development. There is a need to use the Professional Learning Community sessions built into the 7 period day schedule three days per week to conducted targeted sessions and course offerings where teachers are able to identify their areas of growth as per self reflection and Supervisory recommendations and select their own course of improvement.  There is a need to establish a community where educators with effective and highly effective practices who understand the methods of instruction and repeatedly execute them in each of the components of the Danielson rubric, are able to recount process and methods supported by examples of classroom practices and student outcomes. This practice of recognizing the efforts and talents of the staff and the ability of those in need of support to make choices for themselves sustains that all professionals are trusted to both understand what they have to offer, and recognize what is needed to be better at their profession. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, educators and administrators will collaborate to foster the strengths of teachers as resources via grade level planning teams and inter-classroom visitations for best practices as measured by a 3.00 average score in the Planning and Preparation and Professional Responsibilities Domains of the Danielson Framework rubric. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers Teachers with an Effective or Highly Effective rating in Domain 3b, 3c, and/or 3d will be identified, based upon the MoTP Analysis. This group of teachers will work with the Assistant Principals to prepare their environment as model classrooms for professional learning visits. Serving as facilitators teachers will share their insights and expertise with colleagues and celebrate their accomplishments in the practice. Inter-classroom visits will be organized based on the best practices noted in each grade. Teachers of Ells, SWDs and GE students will be surveyed and given the autonomy to choose an area of focus that they would like to improve on within their Literacy Center Objectives and learning activities. Teachers will be afforded the opportunity to attend collaborative planning sessions and inter-classroom visits to see best practices in place for Literacy Centers, peer discussions and reflections during PLC cycles throughout the year. Cycles of learning will be used to strengthen practices based on teacher choice. Teachers All grades (facilitators and attendees) Paraprofessionals October 2018 (site Identification) November 2018 Model Classroom collaboration training and discussion during PLC with Administration) December 2018 -January 2019- Model Classroom Launch and January to May Inter-classroom visits during PLC -Period 7 sessions Monthly cycles of course offerings November 2018 to June 2019 Model Classroom Teachers, Teachers, Assistant Principals Model Classroom Teachers, teachers, Assistant principals 2018-19 CEP 36  Based on administrative needs assessment of teacher practice (formal and informal observations) and teacher choice, teachers may will be asked to attend or will request to attend model classrooms during PLC periods. Teachers will be given the opportunity to observe the practice and at the end debrief with the facilitator. Teachers will be asked to complete a PD "Exit ticket" rating their experience, the learning, impact, and suggestions for improvement. Data from =, 'Exit Tickets," will be shared at future collaborative planning sessions. A group of teachers identified based on their pedagogical strengths will work collaboratively during PLC and after school to create courses on iTunes U. Teacher training will be offered for classroom teachers and paraprofessionals to teach them how to access a course, use the resources, and rate these for improvement as well as make suggestions for future courses that they would like to see. Once trained teachers will be given access to courses for their use and continued self directed learning. Assistant Principals will oversee the timeline of completion and collaborate with teachers creating the courses as well as assign creators to train the staff on use and assist in access and evaluation. Facilitators / course developers will adjust their courses and add to them as suggestions are offered in order to strengthen offering. Teachers December 2018 - June 2019 Model classroom Teachers, Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers iTunes U course building Model Classroom Teachers, Teachers, Assistant Principals January to February 2019. iTunes U training for teachers that to learn how to use the site March 2019. Use and evaluation March to June 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as teachers will be a model replicated in the school. This practice embraced by several teachers in the 2017 - 2018 school year paired parent and child in instruction demonstrations and classroom interaction in teaching other parents and children in the class based on a talent/knowledge base/ learned practice owned by the parent. Teachers will work with the parent to identify presentation areas and support them by contributing to the design of their workshops and securing an audience (children, children and parents, just parents). October 2018- June 2019 SLT Parent Representatives 2018-19 CEP 37  Teachers Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers Grades Pre K – 5; Assistant Principals, 7th period three days per week for Professional Learning Community, Mondays PD 2:30 – 3:40; Tuesday Professional Duties from 3:05 – 3:35; Teacher made professional learning materials, FUNdations, and Scholastic Guided Reading resources.  Per session for teachers working on iTunes-u course (pending funds) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have increased performance in components 3b from 2.3 to 2.65; 3c from 2.3 to 2.65; and 3d from 2.8 to 2.9 as measured by the averaged rating for all teachers observed and rated in each of these components. By February 2019, professional learning sessions in each of the activities will be rated at or above "satisfactory" as measured by PD "Exit tickets". Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Level MOTP Summary Report MOTP Score Tracker Professional Learning Session Surveys (PD Exit Tickets) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The NYC School Survey  93% of the parents/guardians that participated in the NYC School Survey reported that they agreed /strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicates on how they can help students learn.  97% of the parents/guardians agreed/strongly agreed that teachers work closely with families to meet students’ needs  98% of the parents/guardians agreed/strongly agreed that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Other Data:  Participation in the May Parent Teacher Conference night demonstrated extensive attendance and participation by parents. A comparison of the Early spring conference and the later one in May showed that parents were more inclined to attend sessions that engaged them in activities with their children which the May session offered.  Communication with parents has increased significantly as approximately 100% of the teachers use Class DoJo to message parents on class interaction, student performance and behavior in class. Weaknesses: The NYC School Survey  70% of the parents reported that they have been asked to volunteer time to support their school.  85% of parents/guardians agree/strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Other Data  Attendance during Tuesday Parent Engagement sessions is limited with approximately 58% in the early childhood and 26% in the upper elementary. Sharing and celebrating what students are doing as a community of learners is lacking.  2018-19 CEP 39   Attendance to Parent Workshops are highest when addressing ELA and Math, and lowest when addressing social and emotional aspects of child development. Priorities:  A need to increase parent attendance in school activities by replicating the parent child workshop model that provided success during the May 2018 Parent-Teacher Conferences.  Continue communication with parents on specific student outcomes and class performance via Classroom DoJo.  Prepare parents to better understand connection of the child’s social and emotional development to  academic success. Invite parents to participate in class lessons and activities focused on building students’ social and emotional growth through the Stanford Harmony program and other outside and internal resources Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase the number of parent workshop addressing the students’ academic needs in relation to social and emotional growth as evidence by teacher logs, notes, agendas, and signing sheets. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A subcommittee of this School Leadership Team (SLT) will meet to develop a strategic course of action that includes the adherence to the timeline of parent workshops All parents  Host curriculum night where all parents are welcomed to their child’s class to meet the teacher and be introduced to the grade’s curriculum. Teachers will outline the major skills and concepts for grade expectations. ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K - 5 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals; Teacher representative(s) of the SLT; Parent Coordinator September 2018 All Staff, Parent Coordinator  Provide a parent workshop on helping ELL children Parents/Guardians October ENL Coordinator, improve performance in all four modalities of English. The focus will be on understanding the social and emotional needs of the ELL students. Promoting cultural awareness and diversity. (1) of ELL students 2018 Supervisor of ESL,  Conduct parent workshop on strengthening their children’s social and emotional development. Introduce parents to the Stanford Harmony Program. (2) ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K- 5 November 2018 As an extension to the workshop, parents will be invited to watch an activity from the Stanford Harmony Program. (Classroom visit.)  Parent-Teacher Conferences All staff 2018-19 CEP 41 ENL Teachers representing Grades K/1, 2/3, and 4/5, Guidance counselor, Translators Thrive Provider, Parent coordinator, Classroom teachers, Guidance Counselor, Translators.   How to support your child in meeting his/her IEP goals. Parents will be given information to help them understand their child’s IEP. Teacher can share practices that parents can implement at home to help the child meet their IEP goals. (3)  How to support your child’s Literacy Development. Pre-K-2: Building Reading skills 3-5: Preparing for the ELA Parent of students with IEPs. December 2018 ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K - 5 January 2019 IEP Teacher, Special Ed. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Translator. Sussman Associates, Teachers, Parent Coordinators, Translators  How to support your child’s mathematical performance. Foundations of Math ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K - 5 February Parent Coordinator, 2019 Sussman Associates, 3-5 Preparing for the State Math exam Teachers, Parent Coordinators, Translators  Understanding mental health. How does your child’s health impact their schoolwork? (4) ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K – 5 March 2019 Thrive, Parent Coordinator, Translators ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K – 5 ALL Parents / Guardians of students in Grades Pre K - 5 ALL Parents/ Guardians of students in Grades Pre K – 5 All staff April 2019 Western Queens Health, Parent Coordinator, Translators. May 2019 Parent coordinator, Teachers, Translators. All staff  Parent-Teacher Conferences  How positive Parenting supports your child’s social and emotional growth and their performance at school? (5)  What is positive growth mindset? (6) How does positive Growth mind Set impact on student learning?  Classroom visits to watch DoJo videos for Growth Mindset. (Classroom visit.) 2018-19 CEP 42  May Parent Engagement night. Parents are invited into create a project alongside their child.  How to prepare your child for middle school. (Socially, Emotionally, Academically) Helpful strategies to prepare your child for middle school. Understanding the difference between elementary school and middle school. (7)  How to prepare your Pre K student for Kindergarten. (Socially, Emotionally, Academically) Strategies to prepare your child to have a more academic day. (8)  Read Aloud Day. Parents and guest are invited for a read aloud in the classroom and to visit the Literature Fair. ALL Parents/ Guardians of students in Grades Pre K – 5 Grade 5 parents. June 2019 Pre K Parents ALL Parents / Guardians of Pre- K -5 Guidance Counselor, Western Queens Health, Parent Coordinator Pre-K Social Worker, Translator All staff 2018-19 CEP 43  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Western Queens Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principals, Computer Teacher, Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team Teacher member, ESL Coordinator, IEP Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Translators, Teacher created media and presentation resources, Stanford Harmony resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, three out of the all the parent workshops will have a focus on the importance of the social and emotional development of a child and their academic success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Workshop Time-line Workshop agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who were found to be performing below the NYS designated scale score for each grade level on the State ELA Exam, Spring 2018 Students who did not meet criteria for promotion in ELAin June of 2018 Students who are not performing at grade level on current school year’s assessments, and students who are holdovers or were identified as possible holdover in the previous school year Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, 6-8 students in a group. Tier II teacher also provides one-on-one during pullout During the day After school, Saturday Academy After School Extended & Saturday Academy AIS Teachers work with whole class and small groups of students to further develop skills reflected in the data as weaknesses Tier I & II for At-Risk children (Provided by classroom teacher in K-5): Classroom instruction reflecting NY state, NYC, and school curriculum. Differentiation of whole class instruction to target the needs of students with focus on process and product. Materials used : ReadyGEN, Literacy by Design guided reading program, goal instructional materials, (modeling and reteaching /scaffolding,) and FUNdations/ Double Dose Component MyOn and MindPlay as well as iReady are technology resources used by the teachers for academic intervention. All assessment based, the children are placed on a continuum of 2018-19 CEP 45  Mathematics learning with lessons that target specific weaknesses noted in their assessments. After School Extended AIS Differentiation of whole class instruction to target students who are performing at or below level 2; and at or below level 3 who experienced negative gains on the State ELA (Spring 2018). Saturday Academy Targeted instruction specific to needs identified in interim assessment item analysis, iReady, and teacher recommendation Tier I for At-Risk children (Provided by classroom teacher in K-6): Classroom instruction reflecting NY state, NYC, and school curriculum. Differentiation of whole class instruction to target the needs of Tier I students with focus on process and product. Small group instruction, 6-8 students in a group. Tier II teacher also provides one-on-one during pullout During the day After school, Saturday Academy After School Extended & Saturday Academy AIS Teachers work with whole class and small groups of students to further develop skills reflected in the data as weaknesses Materials used for Tier I: Go Math (Houghton Mifflin) Reteach and Tier I activities, and goal Students who were found to be performing below the NYS designated scale score for each grade level on the State Mathematics Exam, Spring 2018 Students who did not meet criteria for promotion in Mathematics Students who are not performing at grade level on current school year’s assessments, and students who are holdovers or were identified as possible 2018-19 CEP 46  holdover in the previous school year instructional materials Science State Science students scoring at or below a level 2 and Tier II for At-Risk children (Provided by Pull-out Teachers) Small group instruction is provided using the, Strategic Intervention (GoMath!)with an emphasis on targeted math skills in both computation and word problem solving. iReady Math provides for one on one support in weakness areas identified in the assessment. Assigned lessons are targeted and specific to the needs of the learner. After School Extended AIS Differentiation of whole class instruction to target students who are performing at or below level 2 on State Math (Spring 2018). Saturday Academy Provides students performing at Level 1 and 2 (State Math 2017) with targeted instruction specific to needs identified in interim assessment item analysis. Tier I for At-Risk children (Provided by Small group During the day 2018-19 CEP 47  students identified based on Teacher observations After school, Saturday Academy classroom teacher in K-6): Classroom instruction reflecting the Next Generation Learning Standards and school curriculum. Targeted students are provided with differentiated instructions and assessed on an ongoing basis to note progress and needs for further intervention within targeted skills. Tier I intervention is done by the classroom teacher for at-risk students based on weaknesses in that affect the way students interpret nonfiction content material. Tier II for At-Risk children (Provided by Reading Students who were found to be performing at Level 1 or 2 (State Science Spring 2018), students who are not performing at grade level on current school year’s assessments, and students who are holdovers or were identified as possible holdover in the previous school year participate in Tier II At-Risk. Teacher input and Academic Intervention Services 2018-19 CEP 48 Small group During the day Social Studies Teacher observation and conferences team evaluation are also part of the process, which identifies Tier II students. After School Extended AIS Differentiation of whole class instruction to target Grade 4 students who are performing at or below grade level. Tier I for At-Risk children (Provided by classroom teacher in K-6): Targeted students are provided with differentiated instruction and assessed on an ongoing basis to note progress and needs for further intervention within targeted skills. Tier I intervention is done by the classroom teacher for at-risk students based on literacy skills weaknesses that affect the way students interpret nonfiction content material. Tier II intervention focuses is conducted by using level specific content text and supplementing the understanding of content through 2018-19 CEP 49  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendation. media and low level content specific text on MyOnand Reading A-Z as well as target literacy support using Great Leaps. Guidance Counselor: Guidance Counselor: Guidance Counselor: All year on a needs basis Fall semester One cycle for Fall and one cycle for Spring One cycle for Fall and one cycle for Spring School Psychologist, Social Worker, Health-Related Providers: Services provided during the school day Outreach program in support of students with prolonged attendance concerns. Self-esteem building sessions with students who did not meet promotion criteria in the previous school year. Collaboration with the classroom teacher at the classroom level with strategies and techniques to handle varied social emotional issues impacting daily performance in school. Prepare students for transition to middle school. Support for at risk students who are not meeting expectations or making necessary progress as measured by ongoing One-On-One Small group Once week for 6 week cycle Once a week for 3-6 week cycle Small group for six week cycle 2018-19 CEP 50  School Psychologist, Social Worker, Health-Related Providers: One-on-one Small group assessments and teacher judgment. School Psychologist: Push in program for students in least restrictive environment. Observation and recommendation for additional intervention or teacher assistance. Behavior management plans follow-up and recommendations. Ongoing dialog with teachers on behavior plan management and adjustment. Social Worker: Independent sessions with students with behavior management concerns that are affecting academic progress. When needed push-in support for students with social emotional concerns in order to support the classroom teacher with additional intervention suggestions Outreach to parents to secure information pertinent to social-emotional development of the student in order to 2018-19 CEP 51  reach a full understanding of the child and develop a full intervention Health-Related Services: Oversee services related to health concerns that affect Provide support provided by paraprofessional when health concern impedes student progress at the social emotional and academic level. The paraprofessional provides ongoing engagement and social-emotional support under the guidance of the classroom teacher and other support personnel. The school nurse works with the student, family, and classroom teacher to ensure that the health condition of the student does not impede academic and emotional progress. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 272 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. . The STH Liaison:  Maintains a folder throughout the school year with ATS reports that include the names of students living in temporary housing situations and lists of services offered as funded by the Title I, Part A mandatory set aside and participates in McKinney-Vento trainings on behalf of the school, each year.  Works cross-functionally with the borough STH Content Expert as well as shelter-based STH staff and school staff. She supports families/students in temporary housing by offering solutions and connecting them with resources.   Works with the principal to ensure that the STH component of the School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan is completed and implemented with a high degree of quality.  Together with the Principal and the pupil personnel secretary, works to identify students in need of services  and supports. Informs school staff (i.e. attendance teachers, pupil accounting secretaries, etc.) on how to respond to a student living in temporary housing and shares resources from trainings.  The school:  Assist registering parent(s) with immediate schools enrollment, even if they do not have: school records; medical records/immunizations; proof of residency; guardianship papers; birth certificates or other documents normally needed  Assist with related support services  Provides school supplies  and uniform  Assist students with free school lunch   Assist with transportation.  Assist students with Special Education and any other related service  Provides parent(s) or registering adult with DOE resources and information on the McKinney-Vento Act. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 CEP 53 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers who are highly qualified for their respective assignments, support our students in their learning. The latest data available on the School report Card shows that 100% of the teachers are fully licensed. This average is much higher that other similar schools and City schools. Teachers assigned to provide Academic Intervention and English as a Second Language are amongst the most experienced in the school. Additional data indicates that P.S. 152 has high levels of teachers that have more than two years in the school. When compared to other schools our percentages are much higher. Teachers are assigned by the Principal to classes that meet their certification area. Grade relevance is considered based on teacher experience and contractual factors. P.S. 152 has staff with over ten years of experience that serves as mentors and support on each grade. Through common preparation periods scheduled into their day one period per week, teachers are able to meet to discuss needs, plan, and discuss grade specific issues and concerns. This support system along with an experienced administration working in P.S. 152 for over 15 years, ensures that the staff is secure and supported in their learning. Teachers meet for professional learning cycles spearheaded by experience lead teachers, administrators, and/or Teacher Teams. These cycles are decided upon based on need and/or teacher surveyed interest. The Professional Learning Committee, composed of teachers and administrators meets regularly to make decisions on the professional learning sessions as these support the instructional focus, goals of this plan, and the needs of the staff and students. Strategies to recruit, train, and retain teachers:  Differentiated Learning for teachers based on abilities, administrative recommendations, strengths and school wide initiatives and goals.  Ensure that teachers are able to benefit from the learning that emanates from the classroom of highly  qualified colleagues through inter-visitation and shared planning. Strong mentoring, which includes on-the-job observations and coaching in the classroom as well as support for teacher planning by experienced highly effective teachers.  The Principal attends Teacher Fairs and interview potential candidates. Those who are a match based on their interview are invited to conduct a lesson in one of the classes. The Principal, Assistant Principal, and at times a 2018-19 CEP 55  teacher from the staff will then discuss the lesson and identify features in the teacher that might make the candidate a possible match for the position.  Through observations conducted by school leaders strengths and weaknesses are identified based on the components of the Danielson Teacher Effectiveness Framework rubric. Teachers presenting weaknesses in common components are grouped for professional learning sessions and sharing of best practices as well as possible inter-visitation with colleagues who have highly effective practices in their classrooms. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will employ lab sites as an additional support for teachers seeking improvement in the components of the Danielson Framework. Sites will be equipped with resources, support materials. teacher created instructional material to share after the lesson demo.  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Learning ensures that teachers are trained in the most updated and effective methods and techniques. At P.S. 152, we understand the critical importance of establishing a common focus for guiding professional development that will maintain our teachers prepared to impart the highest level of standard based instruction. Professional development provided enables teachers to shift their focus on teaching through extensive self-reflective opportunities. Teachers are able to customize instruction to meet the individual needs of students. Professional training also prepares our staff to increase their ability to assess students’ reading/math needs and design and deliver prescriptive instruction through modeling, shared experiences, guided and interactive practice, and collaborative and individual workshop sessions. Inter-visitation where teachers can observe literacy/math lessons and later convene to discuss and reflect on their observations is also a part of the training received by our staff that enables them to impart highly qualified Next Generation Learning Standards based instruction that engages and reaches all learners. Professional learning sessions follow targeted cycles following the format delineated in the Handbook for Professional Learning: Research, Resources, and Strategies for Implementation. These sessions allow teachers to build on their own abilities through varied resources based and paced specifically to their needs. Teacher Teams work together to improve their delivery of instruction and use of techniques and technology. Through collaborative planning and decision making teachers develop ideas and support resources, implement in the classroom, track student outcomes and impact, and discuss results in their teams for modification or sustained practice. After each study cycle of 5 to 6 weeks, teachers are able to make decisions on their next phase of learning and the resources needed to meet their learning targets. Each cycle supports the instructional focus. Supervisory formal and informal observations serve to identify pedagogical weaknesses. Teachers work jointly with the supervisory staff and seasoned teachers on their progress. (The bullets in section 2a. HQT explain the professional growth model highlighted in the school). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 56  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Experienced teachers, resource and extended services personnel as needed, will support transition from pre-school to our Schoolwide early childhood program. P.S. 152 has trained the Pre Kindergarten teachers on the Kindergarten instructional programs. These teachers attend professional development sessions and grade conferences with the Kindergarten teachers in order to continue to grow in their understanding of the curriculum. The goal of this practice is for teachers at this level to comprehend what is expected developmentally of the children at the Kindergarten level in order to include those socialization and instructional techniques that will facilitate transition in the beginning of the following new school year. Moving to kindergarten will usually mean that a child will enter a new setting. However, if both programs are developmentally appropriate, children will be more likely to find similar activities that will allow them to begin their kindergarten experiences confident that they have the ability to accomplish certain tasks. Knowing what is expected adds to the children's self-confidence, encourages their attempts to try new activities, and facilitates continuity in their development. Pre K teachers make sure children have important skills such as the ability to retell a simple story and to recognize the letters in their names when they enter kindergarten. They focus on skills such as tracing the shapes of letters and numbers on paper, following simple instructions, recognizing the title of a book, and matching rhyming sounds. Those children who come to P.S. 152 after attending preschool at other sites are given transitional experiences with the assistance of the Kindergarten teacher. The Kindergarten teacher ensures that the environment is welcoming and inclusive of the child’s world (pictures associated to names on the word wall, cubbies with the children’s picture and name, tables grouped for socialization, etc) The Kindergarten teachers work at making the new environment familiar so that the children look forward to the new experience with a sense of excitement and anticipation rather than feeling threatened and fearful of what lies ahead. Transition activities for young children are like those that prepare them for anything new and can include discussions, stories, games, dramatic play, and field trips. In addition the following are transitioning practices followed with pre-schoolers coming to our school:  Before the children commence Kindergarten, we hold an open house for parents to visit the school with their  child. In September, we hold a back-to-school evening so that parents can visit the classroom, take part in sample activities, and participate in a discussion of the expectations for the Kindergarten student. 2018-19 CEP 57   The Administration offers an orientation for the parents on the first day of Kindergarten availing parents of all of the information pertinent to the practices specific to the grade. Plan to phase in groups of children during the first week of school in order to provide more individual attention to each child.  We encourage parents to become volunteers by participating in preparation programs that will allow them to work in classrooms assisting in varied aspects.  We provide a parent orientation package including: the child's new schedule, transportation procedures, required school forms, food service, and other program information. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All discussion of data begins in the School Leadership Team meetings. Because each school constituent is represented in the Team, the results of all discussions are later shared with teachers and other staff. Team members share the interpretation and results of all assessment data with their respective constituent during common preparation periods and grade conferences. Conferences are conducted amongst concerned groups to discuss findings further and develop plans of action for intervention. Subcommittees of the School Leadership Team conduct further research and report on alternatives for action. These are proposed to the School Leadership Team for further consideration. Teacher Teams spearheaded several indepth studies of the data results found in various sources. Through target group studies, teams have quantified findings that have been shared with teachers. Systemic change has taken place where weaknesses have been noted. Multi-level teams worked on student deficiencies found in the data and addressed in the Comprehensive Education Plan Goals and Action Plan. Teacher teams meet two sessions per month on Mondays (2:25 to 3:45 PM). During these sessions teachers manage and make decision about their learning, analyze student work and outcomes as these impact on their learning, and discuss intervention options. Teachers develop strategies and techniques for intervention to address weaknesses observed in the student samples. They identify potential instructional gaps while considering: ● Is literacy and content instruction emphasizing depth and recognition of pre-requisite concepts ● Are teachers using best pedagogical practices and research-based approaches? ● Is instruction accessible to all groups of students through differentiation of process? The techniques and strategies are then implemented in the classroom and tracked. Student performance is assessed at a mid point and the results are discussed by the teacher for instructional adjustments. A final task serves as the decision making piece that leads to systemic change. Professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction is ongoing. Teacher Teams are guided throughout the investigative and evaluative process by Team leaders that collaborate with the Data Specialist. During these sessions, team leaders are trained in the use of data analysis, highlighting trends, researching and discussion options for intervention, tracking alternatives, and other topics of preference identified by the Teams. In the 2018 2019 school year as the school works on literacy shifts in Grades K to 2, the Advance Literacy Committee will be exploring alternatives for assessment that are the most effective at identifying the necessary data to support 2018-19 CEP 58  learners . The goal is to eliminate multiple testing and assessment that overlap or systems that provide information that is not of use to the teacher. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A - 5E, 6, 7 5C 5A, 5C TBA 5A - 5E, 6, 7 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 524,605.00 85,777.00 44,750.00 TBA 6,043,708.00 X X X TBA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 59   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 60  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Gwendoline N. Alleyne School, P.S. 152Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Gwendoline N. Alleyne School, P.S. 152Q. will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 CEP 61  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  2018-19 CEP 62   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Gwendoline N. Alleyne School, P.S. 152Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 63  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 64  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 65  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-19 CEP 67  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The New York City results on the New York State 2017 English Language Arts (ELA) test data results specific to English Language Learners (Ells) indicates that 62.6% of Former Ells were found to be performing at or above grade level while only 13.4% of Ells reached on or above grade level performance. When observing data results specific to the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) student performance in the literacy (Reading and Writing) continues to be the modalities of greater difficulty for students to reach proficiency across all grade levels. Data specific to English Language Arts denotes additional concerns and the need to address this subgroup with techniques and strategies that will enable them to reach Level 3 performance across all grades. When analyzing the data, we noticed an increase in the numbers of ELLs performing at Level 1 on the ELA. In 2016, 51.1% of ELLs were performing at level 1 on the ELA as compared to 53.8% in 2017. This group must be supported to allow them to increase their ability and performance in literacy and language proficiency for the 2018-2019 school year. With the Standards based literacy shift leaning toward heavy reliance on content based non fiction reading and writing, background knowledge, foundation, vocabulary, and exposure have become key to the success. The Instructional focus of the supplementary program for Ells will include an increase in interactive technology based lessons, exposure to real world experiences through multimedia and virtual learning in an effort to customize visual presentation of information, and exploring multiple ways of presenting verbal information so that it transfers to learning. Instructional decisions have to focus on literacy instruction through methods of language development. The core of the deficiencies in readers whose first language (L1) is other than English is routed in the weaknesses found in the second language (L2) instruction and how well students are able to transfer concepts and experiences from one language to the other. With this in mind, we will offer a program that builds on the structures of language while approaching literacy from the perspective of the development of language. Teaching literacy skills and strategies will be strategic and structured to ensure that structures are being put in place for the student to move from one level to another through carefully mapped plans. Second language acquisition research has shown that the level of proficiency in the first language has a direct influence on the development of proficiency in the second language. A high percentage of these children are not “literate” in a first language, therefore transference of skills from L1 to L2 is not possible. The instructional model however, is built on the premise of a preexisting L1 knowledge that is simply not there with many of our learners. Since the child’s level of sophistication in the second language (L2) will dictate their ability to tackle grade specific reading selections, our efforts must focus on maximizing and strengthening language development from its initial stages through exposure to meaningful language experiences that tap into all modalities. There is a need to continue to teach Ells in a rigorous literacy model providing a balance of explicit instruction and student-directed activities that incorporate aspects of both traditional and meaning-based curricula from an L2 perspective with specific context embedded vocabulary instruction and language centered goals. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Therefore the focus of both extended day afterschool and Saturday Academy programs will be Literacy and academic language development in the content area. The extended day supplemental program will be Literacy based with a focus on nonfiction informational text reading and response to literature with an emphasis on quoting from text and using context vocabulary based on the Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts. Academic English is the language of school-based learning and entails understanding the structure of language and the precise way that words and phrases are used, including content-specific vocabulary. More nuanced and de-contextualized than conversational English, it requires a high degree of precision in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. This becomes especially difficult for readers of nonfiction therefore when Ells read this genre, instruction will focus on the specifics of how to interpret subtitles, diagrams, illustrations, charts, and other text features that aid in understanding the content. Teachers will focus on teaching students strategies that they are able to transfer to their daily reading when interpreting unknown vocabulary, new words in their reading, and new text. Students will work on strategies for writing about reading using techniques that substantiate their thesis with events from their reading. For this purpose, graphic organizers that “chuck” information will be instrumental. Read alouds, “think alouds”, modeling, structure instruction using procedural strategies will serve to guide students in strengthening this method of writing. Teachers will provide scaffolding through vocabulary word study and pictorial interpretation to facilitate the children’s understanding of concepts and text. Additionally, given the demands of content and the Ells ability to comprehend and respond to content embedded vocabulary, one session per week of after school and one hour and thirty minutes of the Saturday Academy session will address Mathematics and Science specific language learning. Technology provides an additional forum by which to provide differentiation challenging accelerated learners and remediation for those who are struggling. Computer programs and Internet sources will be used as support. BrainPOP for interactive instruction, Reading A – Z, Raz Kids, MyOn, and MindPlay for small group differentiation and literacy support for all learners. These programs will be available to the Afterschool and Academy Teachers at no cost to Title III. Program: The supplemental language instruction programs under Title III will support ELLs and former Ells in an extended instructional day program that will included grades 4 - 5 After school and grade 3-5 in a Saturday Academy. The supplemental language instruction program funded under Title III will take place after school in an extended day schedule for 1 hour and 50 minutes (from 3:10 PM to 5:00 PM) two days per week (Wednesdays and Thursdays) as follows: one in grade 4 and one in grade 5; from October to May for a total of 54 sessions taught by 2 certified ESL teachers. An additional supplementary program addressing literacy skills will take place on Saturdays to support Ells in grades 3 -5 as follows: one bridged 3rd and 4th grade group and one 5th grade group. Saturday Academy sessions will run for 4 hours from 8:00 AM to 12:00 PM from January to May for a total of 15 sessions. Instruction in the Saturday Academy will be provided by a total of 2 certified ESL teachers. Teachers will record attendance on class lists which will be collected and held by the program supervisors. The Saturday Academy will be open to English Language learners only for the purpose of this supplementary program. Parents of selected students will receive notification of the Title III programs in their preferred language on which they will either accept or decline the offer to attend the program. The program supervisors will retain the parent notifications forms on file in their office. The supervisor will oversee the program and serve as the instructional leader guiding all decisions specific to curriculum and, instructional support for the Ell staff. These will include 15 sessions for 5 hours from 7:30 AM to 12:30 PM in order to oversee student management, curriculum preparation for each session, and teacher feedback sessions to continue to improve teacher performance and execution of duties. The target 2018-19 CEP 70  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information population of both programs will include Ells that are at the Entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding proficiency levels as well as former Ells who reached proficiency on or after the Spring of 2017. The language of instruction for both the After school program and the Saturday Academy will be English. Materials The extended day after school and Saturday program teachers will use the Ready Extended Math (Curriculum Associates) Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, and Buckle Down ELA (Triumph Learning) for skills development as they deliver instruction. These programs are supplemental materials and differ from the programs used during the day. To support the students in their home language, the after school program will offer a lending library with books in the home language and enable the students to use the MyOn on-line texts that are offered in Spanish. Additional resources will include, but are not limited to, Reading A - Z in conjunction with Non Fiction reading units in writing; MyOn Learning, RazKids, MindPlay, and BrainPop technology. (available at no cost to Title III). The Materials and supplies for the students' portfolios and the delivery of instruction will be included. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Professional Development P.S. 152’s schoolwide instructional focus centers on student engagement. Language development is at the center of our focus and therefore professional learning sessions on Mondays from 2:25 to 3:40 hosts varied sessions around our focal theme with prolonged study around language development with our teachers of Ells. Facilitators of the workshops will set the agendas and create an attendance sheet. Copies of the agendas and the attendance sheets will be held by the supervisor of the school-wide professional learning communities. We will follow the Citywide Professional Learning Model for the purposes of the Title III Saturday Academy and Afterschool programs. Teachers leading the instruction in the programs will comprise one of the study groups that will meet on Monday, December 3, 10, 17, January 7 from 2:25 to 3:45 PM (1 hour and 20 minutes) along with Tuesday, December 4, and January 8 from 3:05 to 3:45 (40 minutes) for professional learning focused on the language and literacy needs identified in the data specific to Ells in grades 3 – 5. The program supervisor (also ESL certified) will engage in the study phase with the teachers. The teachers will use a session to isolate deficiencies and strategize approaches for intervention. Sessions 2 and 3 will include methods / techniques research and familiarize themselves with the research and success rates of the techniques of preference. The following session will include planning for implementation beginning with inter/intra-visitation where techniques and practices are being executed successfully followed by planning for implementation. Teachers will maintain logs of the implementation phase. Student data collected during this phase will be brought to sessions when the team of teachers meets to discuss results and next steps. Teachers will have the opportunity to invite colleagues with expertise to their session as well as view instructional video to support their learning and increase discussion. The concluding session will include an overall evaluation 2018-19 CEP 71  Part C: Professional Development of the process with recommendations for systemic structures to follow across the Ell programs. The impact on student progress as a result of the professional development cycle will be based on the students’ growth in the areas of deficiencies that were identified by the teachers. After specific intervention practices, the growth will be measured through both formal and informal assessments All Title III teachers attend the 7 hours on ESL methods to be implemented in the Title III program. Following the research based study, analysis, implementation, and documentation phase of their learning, Ell teachers will continue their learning by focusing on workshops that lead to the overall improvement of ESL and content teaching through differentiated needs based instruction. The teachers providing instruction in the program will partake of monthly data analysis and goal setting session. During this time they will discuss data results and analyze each item for strengths and weaknesses connected to each of the language strands. This will enable them to make decisions as to the next instructional steps to follow on the instructional continuum. Additional sessions in professional development for Title III will include, but are not limited to: • Building a better understanding of differentiated instruction and how to use this technique to address academic and linguistic needs. • Developing academic discourse through experiences, discussion, listening, describing observations, reading graphic representations, and writing about what the learn. Using technology (multimedia and equipment) to achieve differentiation and tap into modalities in varied and diverse ways. • Developing mathematics literacy through discussion, application, and analysis of alternative paths to problem solution. Sustaining ongoing discussion and reasoning of mathematical problem solving in accordance with the Common Core Learning Standards. • How to make students active learners through teaching strategies. It is expected that learners that become skilled at how to use a strategy effectively, will replicate the process when given other tasks. Funding for professional development is provided by sources other than Title III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The ESL Coordinator and the Program Supervisor (ESL certified) will plan and conduct sessions for the parents of Ells. The goal is to enable parents to build literacy and math skills in the home through strategies that engage and support learning. Parents will attend sessions during the school day from 8:30 to 9:50 for 1 hour and 20 minutes one day per month and on Tuesdays during the Months of January and February from 2:30 – 3:05 (35 minutes). The latter of these sessions held on Tuesdays will include parents in small groups according to program participation. Notices will be sent home, in the preferred languages, with the children identifying the sessions that the parent can attend. By running sessions in series parents have a greater selection available for them to attend as they deem needed. A monthly Newsletter and Calendar 2018-19 CEP 72 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities sent home with the child will include reminders of these sessions for the parents to sign up and attend. Additionally through funding provided by Title I parents attend workshops on a variety of Language Development topics will have access to translated versions of the resources and materials (Translation Interpretation Title I SWP funding). The Parent coordinator will maintain the all invitations, agendas and attendance sheets for the Title III parent engagement activities. Topics will include understanding the Common Core Learning Standards and how these impact on each child; understanding educational accountability grade-level math and reading curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity access student data online; understanding a child's social and emotional development the impact on academic achievement. Sessions are provided at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-19 CEP 74  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Gwendoline N. Alleyne School Borough Queens School Number 152 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Vincent J. Vitolo Coach Sari Madden ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kelsy Coba Teacher/Subject Area Ester Lim/ESL/CB Teacher/Subject Area Renee Sciacca/ESL/CB Related-Service Provider Maria Bonacci Superintendent Dr. Philip Composto Assistant Principal Enid Maldonado Coach Sari Madden School Counselor Daniel Stegner Parent Choeying Tashishar Parent Coordinator Wanda Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Yeung Gar Yan Other (Name and Title) Elizabeth Economakos, A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 29 30 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 12 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1039 2018-19 CEP 75 Total number of ELLs 335 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.24%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 K 1 1 1 2 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In the 2017 – 2018 school year literacy skills were assessed through the use of the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (BAS). This assessment system, allows teachers to monitor reading level three times each year. It yields level (with equivalent grade levels), accuracy, fluency, and detailed information and scores on comprehension in reading. The reading level assessments guide instructional planning by establishing the instructional and independent reading levels for the students. The teachers provide small, guided reading instruction at least once a week at the students' instructional level. The following are the % of students on or above grade level as of February 2018: K: 29% Grade 1: 14%, Grade 2: 45%, Grade 3: 55%, Grade 4: 50% Grade 5: 55 %. Bases on the data, grades K-2, will provide two guided reading lesson per week for each group for the 2018-2019 school years. 2018-19 CEP 76  On demand writing narratives were tracked throughout the school year to assess progress in organization, word use, development of ideas, use of transitional words, and grammar including punctuation. We later added the children’s ability to state an idea / position and justify it through text evidence, facts, and other methods for proof. It was noted that while progress in the length of written pieces and proliferation of ideas was noted by the end of the school year, writing still lack sophistication with simple sentences dominating most pieces. Justifying in writing after stating an opinion was a weakness across most Ells. Guided practice only allowed for very structured responses to reading but they usually lack evidence / details from the text. In analyzing the 2017 NYSESLAT data in the NYC DOE EDAT, it was evident that the highest area of need was in the modality of writing. Students across grades 1 through 5 fell into the category of, "Modality of Need," for writing where as there were no students identified, "In need," for the modalities of reading and listening, and a very small number in speaking. The following is the chart of students who scored low in the designated modalities: The school has made the decision to implement the, "Schoolwide's Writing Fundamentals" program which offers explicit instruction throughout varied genres units of studies with assessment components. The program allows for students to be immersed in rich literature as mentor text to learn how writer's organize their thoughts and communicate clearly to their readers. The thematic approach to writing builds capacity for academic vocabulary and writing skills. The impact of this data continues to guide instructional teams of teachers in decision making and the course of action to follow when planning lessons that address language development while promoting literacy. The success of the literacy instruction in the 2018 – 2019 school year will be in the teachers’ abilities to continue teaching to the rigor of the Common Core Learning Standards through the school wide program Pearson’s ReadyGen, Schoolwide Writing Fundamentals, and Wilson's FUNdation's phonics program (K-2) while not losing sight of the language development needs of the Ells so that the instruction has a solid and meaningful impact. This will rely heavily on the teachers’ abilities to differentiation by process allowing children to reach the common Standard goal all other children must achieve by through a diversified and unique path. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school has implemented a 90 minute literacy block during which reading, writing, and word work/phonics is taught. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of ELL programs are measured based on progressive growth in language development. Each year the data specialist will compare the data results from one year to the next as follows: ELL Data for NYSESLAT from the NYC DOE EDAT: 339 ELLs took the 2017 NYSESLAT, 18.6 % (63 students) scored Commanding. 93 NYSESLAT takers advanced 1 level. 18 NYSESLAT takers advanced 2 levels. 5 NYSESLAT takers advanced 3 levels. 0 NYSESLAT takers advanced 4 levels. 94 NYSESLAT takers remained at the same level. ELL DATA for the 2017 ELA: ELL DATA for the 2017 MATH: The steady growth of ELLs and Former ELLs, ever Ells, continues to growth in the area of ELA. There was a small decrease in the percentage of current ELLs proficiency level in math. The school has identified math as an area of need for the current ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 77  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school identifies all students, "At Risk," and shares the information with the classroom teachers. "At Risk," children are identified by the following criteria: The classroom teachers provide the first level of intervention. The school then utilizes the AIS teachers to provide intervention for the identified students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Given the analysis of all data results, students are provided with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs. It is expected that by assuming a diagnosis-prescriptive model in which differentiation serves to scaffold the learning, children will be able to complete rigorously challenging tasks required as part of the Common Core Standards, The overall goal within the specific monitoring of RtI is further enhanced by knowing the data specific to the learner in order to avoid misconceptions on a child’s inability to complete assignments, tasks, and/or activities used to measure the progress. Data allows us to determine whether students are benefiting from the instructional program in order for the school to make decisions about the effectiveness of the program for the children; allow for the school to vary instruction and measure the effectiveness of varied forms of instruction; target instruction so that we are able to reduce the number of unwarranted referrals to special education The school based assessments of Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessments and Go Math are utilized to identify children that are "At-Risk," as well as the NYS ELA and Math and NYSESLAT exams. The classroom teacher provides the first tier of intervention for "At -Risk" students. After a six to eight week cycle of intervention, if no or little progress is made, the teacher refers the child for Tier II intervention which is provided by the AIS teacher in a 6 to 8 week pull out program ranging from 1 to 3 days per week. If a child shows more need of intervention, the child then receives Tier III intervention which is provided by the AIS teacher at lest 4 to 5 days a week. Teachers providing AIS may use the following resources for intervention: Double Dose FUNdations, Wilson's Language Training Great Leaps for reading and math Go MAth RtI Resource kit Scholastic Guided reading program 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school analyzes data from the EDAT and RLAT to look for trends which inform us about our ELL programs. The following is a break down of the levels of proficiency by each grade. CM EX TR EM EN 2017 K Current grade 1 21% 2018-19 CEP 78  62% 4% 11% 2% 2017 1st Current grade 2 5% 35% 38% 20% 2% 2017 2nd Current grade 3 40% 49% 8% 3% _ 2017 3rd Current grade 4 9% 52% 20% 19% _ 2017 4th Current grade 5 12% 54% 22% 2018-19 CEP 79  10% 2% Data patterns reveal by the NYSESLAT data indicate that the higher percentages of children of achieving CM are highest in K and in Grade 2 with the lowest level of students reaching CM in grade 1. The data in grade 1 correlates with the low percentage of students reading at grade level based on the Fountas and Pinell assessments, which was only at 20%. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data specialist shares all data analysis with the entire staff during professional development sessions. Teachers utilize the data to launch their data inquiry studies. Teams of teachers meet at least twice a month to conduct their data inquiry studies in an effort to meet the needs of the students and to improve performance and progress outcomes. Grade Supervisors review data with individual teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs participate in an instructional program that is based on the Common Core Learning Standards. The instructional program is rigorous and holds learners to high expectations as are the resources and materials used to teach. Every grade level (K-5) has at least two ENL or ENL/FELL self-contained classes with an ESL/Common Branch teacher. Within the ENL classes, every effort is made to have all EN and EM students placed together in one class and the TR and EX in the other ENL class. Ells who have recently reach Commanding proficiency are heterogeneously grouped in a class with English Proficient (EP) students and receive 90 minutes of intergrated ENL instruction Proficient. If the classroom teacher is ESL/CB, then the teacher provides the 90 minutes og ENL intergrated instruction. If the FELL students are placed with a General Education teacher, then the ESL Common Branch Cluster teachers provide them with the ninety minutes of integrated ENL. The ENL service is given within a fifty minute period for Science and/or an additional period for ELA. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction per week. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction as per CR part 154 regulations. The ESL/Common Branch teacher provides the stand-alone model of ENL instruction to the EN and EM students within the classroom. The ENL integrated model of ENL instruction is also provided to all levels of ELLs within the classroom by the ESL/Common Branch teacher. English Language Learners are grouped for instruction within the classroom in varied configurations in order to meet the needs identified in literacy, content, language, and other forms of testing and assessments. Lessons begin with a teaching purpose (Teaching Point) and/or an essential question. The teacher models and engages children in discussion through guided multi level critical questions to cultivate purposeful conversation. During this discussion the teacher is targeting discourse and oral production skills as well as language structures and functions. The teacher models the use of specific language, vocabulary, and content specific terms (in content lessons). Examples and samples are modeled, discussed, executed by children with teacher prompting, and reinforced before the children are asked to work independently or in groups. The children are then asked to work on a task linked to the teaching to 2018-19 CEP 80  further practice what was taught while the teacher works with a targeted group on a skill, strategy, or reinforcement / reteach guided by the goals of the group of children being taught. In literacy, social studies and science lessons the children are working on reading / writing skills as well as content specific skills during this time. When the teacher is directly engaged in the group instruction specific skills are targeted and that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. Instruction in small group is never random, and is always routed in the needs highlighted in the data sources. The teacher then checks in on students working outside the group and closes the lesson with the essential question. Teachers use a rich repertoire of scaffolds to support students’ understanding of the main academic content. Scaffolds can take place before, during, and after a lesson as required by the student(s). Instructional materials include a wide range of print, visual and digital resources judiciously selected to increase English language proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. Bi-lingual teachers are in the TBE classes in grades K-2. English as a New Language instruction is designed to develop skills in understanding, speaking, reading, writing and communicating in English through the integration of academic content appropriate for the pupil's age,grade level and English language skills. The time requirements for ENL instruction within a bilingual education program shall be the same as those established for the ENL instruction within a freestanding ENL program as per CR Part 154. In addition to ENL instruction the students in the TBE program also receive HLA instruction The TBE classes (grades K – 2) lessons follow a structure similar to the ENL free standing self-contained class. For ELA/ENL, teachers implement the Pearson’s ReadyGen, FUNdations, and the Writing Fundamentals programs. Translated versions in Spanish of both the ReadyGEN and Writing FUNdamentals are utilized for the HLA instruction in additional to La Cartilla Spanish phonics program. Teachers utilize the Scholastic Guide Reading Program in both English and Spanish for small group lessons. All students in the TBE program receive Science in their HLA as the minimum of 1 content area subject. (Spanish versions of Harcourt Science and the new Amplified Science program) For students at the EN and EM levels of English proficiency, Math is also taught in the home language. (Go Math Spanish.) The learning standards for ELA and ENL, and key ideas and performance indicators for such standards, are basis for the HLA and ENL curricula as per CR Part 154. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The administration places all ELL and F-ELLS in either ENL contained or mixed class with certified teachers. The supervisor of the ESL department sits with the Pupil Personal secretary and programs all ELLs and F-ELLS into STARS. Minutes of instructions are designated within the STARS program. All ELLs are in ENL contained classes, therefore the courses are designated as ESL. The courses for F-ELLs are also specified as ESL in STARS. The administration reviews all ELL student class placement, the students’ proficiency levels, the ESL/Common Branch and TBE teacher’s program cards, schedules, lesson plans, and daily, "Flow of the Day," charts to ensure that all minutes of ENL instruction are provided for as stated in the CR Part 154 for ENL classes and additionally for the TBE classes with a designation of periods of HLA and bi-lingual content instruction. The organization of the staff at P.S. 152 is strategic and based on the language develop needs and mandates for the English Language Learners. One hundred percent of the educators teaching the free standing ESL self-contained classes are fully licensed and certified in Common Branches (or Early Childhood) and English as a Second Language. The educators teaching TBE 2018-19 CEP 81  classes are fully licensed and certified to teach Bilingual Education. Given that these teachers provide all literacy and content Instruction, all service periods are included within their instructional program. The experienced school administration provides an added support for the ENL and TBE classes given their experience and licensing/certification areas. Two of the Four Administrators of the building taught either ESL or Bilingual classes as teachers in the same school. Students in free-standing ENL classes who are performing at Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction which includes 180 minutes of stand alone ENL for EN students and 90 minutes os stand alone ENL for EM students. The students that are at the Expanding and Transitioning proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of ENL weekly provided in by the classroom teachers who is certified in Common Branches and ESL. Students at the Commanding levels of proficiency may be in a mixed EP and Former ENL class and receive 90 minutes of intergrated ENL instruction per week as per CR Part 154 regulations. Through guided and strategy lessons, interactive experiences, collaborative sessions, and individual conferences, the students are led to interact in, reflect, read, write, problem solve, develop and practice strategies, in the second language. Instruction is differentiated and supported by ESL methods in accordance with Common Core Learning Standards, the New York City Department of Education Language Allocation Policy Guidelines, and CR Part 154. The Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) Program classes in P.S. 152 include all proficiency levels. As mentioned above, the administration reviews the students proficiency levels and the TBE teachers' program cards, schedules, Flow of the Day and plans to ensure that the TBE language allocations are met. The percentage of English and Home Language allocation differs for the students at varying levels. For example, the teacher maintains the 75% HL to 25% English for EN children through small group instruction if the majority of the class is at level TR and EX. A Bilingual Common Branches / Early Childhood certified teacher provides instruction that consists of all content and literacy. Units of instruction are inclusive and include ENL instruction for all ELLs as required under CR Part 154 -360 minutes per week for those children at the Entering and Emerging levels with either 180 or 90 minutes of ENL stand alone instruction; 180 minutes for those children at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. Additionally 45 minutes of Home Language Arts instruction is provided by the bilingual teacher daily and a minimum of one content area, Science, for all students, and the additional content area of Math for students at the EN and EM proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Instruction in the self contained ENL classroom is taught by the teacher that is dual certified in ENL and common branches. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Literacy running records, as well as content area assessment materials, are made available to the teacher in the Native language to ensure that assessment in NL continues throughout the year. These are submitted to the grade supervisor for review. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE The students in this category are working at a disadvantage to their peers. Lacking foundations in their native language, these students need to learn the basics in order to create a foundation for their learning. The goal is to provide children with differentiated lessons that highlight the strengths to support the weaknesses of the Ells in this group. With this goal in mind, this population of students will receive the following support: An ENL teacher will pull-out one 40 minute period per week to provide lessons English instruction that as specific to day to day 2018-19 CEP 82  language. Teachers will provide individual support in guided lessons with a group of peers reading at the same level using high interest text. Teachers will teach writing through interactive lessons. Teachers will build on students’ language skills through storytelling and opportunities for students to share story orally. Increased use of literature that is culturally relevant. Teachers will preview their lessons with careful consideration of the SIFE students’ needs in order to comprehend the content being presented. Academic language will be taught explicitly by highlighting and interpreting vocabulary beforehand. Whenever possible concepts will be presented in the native language through the support of bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals, parent volunteers, or peers. The guidance counselor provides support for the student. Newcomers (ELLs less than 3 years) This data for this group of learners is monitored closely. The instructional focus at this level includes active engagement with multiple opportunities afforded for learners to use language productively. Instructional experiences are differentiated to make content comprehensible in order to build confidence. Teachers track student progress on a spectrum dictated by short-term goals that are carefully monitored. Small group instruction is ongoing in all content and literacy instruction where students work at a developmentally appropriate level building on their language and academic strengths. Newcomers in their first year receive intensive language building instruction in a small group daily. A “Newcomer Kit” consisting of basic language activities and vocabulary are included in daily lessons to scaffold for the deeper work the student will engage in later in the year. Students at this level partake whole group lessons that are based on State standards, content scope and sequence, and curriculum for the grade. Differentiated techniques, practice, and tiered activities allow for the children at this level to work on content specific themes and topics while doing so at a level that is developmentally appropriate. Teacher create student driven literacy/language centers to support he Newcomers language development. The centers may include, but are not limited to vocabulary building activities, Word Work, a listening center, and a reading center. Additional support is provided for this group of students in the following: All Ells are held to NYS learning standards and CCLS An instructional program that uses materials in alignment with the Citywide curriculum. Ongoing assessment is provided to ensure that student achievement is periodically measured. Teachers confer with students to continue to build on what they know. Fifteen to twenty minutes per day are used for guided reading and building vocabulary. Read aloud is used to expose children to experiences with the second language. High frequency vocabulary is taught and exhibited throughout on the Word Wall. Reading and Writing lessons are taught every day in English (TBA in the Native language). Culturally relevant level appropriate text is available for the children to read. Dual language books are included in the classroom library. Language development is intensive through experiences, lessons, and exchanges with partners. Content lessons are previewed and vocabulary is explained prior to engaging in the lesson. Teachers take into consideration students’ prior knowledge and experience with language introducing a lesson. Classroom libraries are level and age appropriate and contain varied genre, fiction, and nonfiction. English Language Learners (4 – 6 years) The identification of students in this subgroup emanates from a careful analysis of the years the student has been in the New York City Public School system, without interruption, and receiving services in a program for English Language Learners. The students were previously screened and the date of entry into the New York City School system checked to verify the years of ENL/Bilingual services the child has received. Some students in this category have also been identified as having received more than 3 requests for extension of services on the A-11. 2018-19 CEP 83  In seeking to meet the needs of this group careful analysis of the academic records is followed in order to obtain a clear image of the needs of the students. This process includes: Analysis of NYSESLAT testing history to look for trends in progress (or lack of). Modalities are analyzed through the years of testing to pinpoint areas of specific need. Scores obtained by from Citywide, State and other assessments are reviewed for trends. Attendance records are reviewed to look for gaps in instruction. A tracking system that matches data from year to year to note progression (or lack of) Parents are interviewed to gain an image of home study and academic practices. Teacher assessments, conferences, writing samples are assessed for trends and weaknesses. Intervention logs and participation in each Tier is discussed in order to seek alternative plans of action that may require a recommendation to the Academic Intervention Team. This group of students participates in our Title III Saturday or Extended day Academic Intervention program. In the regular school day, they are serviced in Reading and Math by an Academic Intervention (Title I) teacher or a teacher certified to teach English as a Second Language. Their needs are assessed regularly and discussed with the Academic Intervention Team in order to make revisions of their intervention plans. Long Term ELLs Students in this category are comprised of a small group at our school, however, many concerns arise when we approach the varied needs of these students. It has been determined that students in this category have reached the social language goals and in some cases, the content language skills are mastered at a comprehension level, however, literacy is the weakness keeping them from reaching proficiency. The guidance counselor works with these students as support personnel to engage students in activities of group dialogue aimed at building interactive language and confidence. Given the age of this group, lower reading levels consisting of low interest text is not useful. Therefore, we look to other resources for text to engage these learners in literacy experiences that are meaningful. The Pupil Personnel Support Committee (PPSC), composed of the Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, School Psychologist, Social Worker, Educational Evaluator, Special Education IEP Teacher, Resource Room Teacher, Speech and other related services professionals, meet twice a month to plan for children in need of extra support. Long term Ells may be addressed in these meetings. The main goal of the PPSC is to provide educational preventive services to students who are exhibiting academic and/or social-emotional difficulties by developing an intervention plan that provides classroom-based direct services. The members of this team are involved in defining the areas of concern, exploring and outlining possible interventions, developing an intervention plan, reviewing the progress of the plan, deciding whether to continue interventions, modifying the plan, or refer the student to the IEP Team for formal Psychoeducational Evaluation and other services. As a result support staff are deployed to serve students who require curriculum modifications and accommodations. This process will continue to ensure that the long term Ells are provided with varied opportunities to develop within the least restrictive environment. The student support services will be provided as follows. Continued redeployment of support staff to serve students in this group who require curriculum modifications and accommodations. The Pupil Personnel Support Committee, composed of the Principal, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, School Psychologist, Social Worker, Special education Teacher, Resource Room Teacher, Speech and other related services teachers meet o review progress and revise support plan as needed. Clearly defined areas of concern will help to solidify the plan for each student. Provide an Academic Intervention program that supports children by addressing the needs identified through ongoing assessment, observations, and conferences in small group intervention. This program will require the expertise of a push-in teacher who has knowledge of English as a New Language methodologies. Decide whether to continue intervention, modify the plan, or refer the student to the IEP Team for formal psychoeducational Evaluation and other services. 2018-19 CEP 84  The guidance counselors will serves as the Case Manager to disseminate the School Committee Intervention Plan to the classroom teacher. Professional development is provided for all teachers on the intervention requests and the referral process, intervention strategies, implementing the SCIP and monitoring and reporting on the outcome. Continue to note the progression of students in receiving special services as they achieve identified goals while working in a more prescriptive manner where each level of difficulty is diagnosed through assessment, intervene through specific strategies and reassessed for progress before moving on to another deficiency. Continue to provide high quality intervention; as well as mandated services as identified on the IEP for at-risk and/or special needs long term Ells. Former Ells P.S. 152 understands the transitions that this group is still experiencing and therefore provides added support in after school and or Saturday school programs. Former Ells are also placed strategically in classes with ENL teachers who understand the language development process and provide 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. TESTING accommodations for ELLS and Former ELLs. (Former ELLs can receive accommodations for two years after reaching CM level.) ELLs that are eligible for a one- time exemption from the New York State English Language Arts Exam in grades 3-5. To be identified as Exempt, he or she must have been attending less than one year as of April 1 of the year in which the ELA is administered. All ELLs are given a time extension of at least, "time and a half," or otherwise noted by the teacher with the approval of the principal. Time extension is also provided for classroom exams. All ELLs are given a separate location for testing. All ELLs may have the listening passage read a third time. Bilingual glossaries/dictionaries may be given for exams except for language exams. ELL may have both the English and home language version of state exams if available. In the event that a home language copy is not available, then an oral translator may be provided except for ELA exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 152 provides for the instruction of ELL-SWD follow a content and level specific curriculum and materials. Teachers of the classes of ELL-SWD have the same literacy and content materials as the ESl, TBE, and General Education classes. Differentiation is what allows the students in this subgroup a form of success in meeting the demands of the content. Each teacher of children in this group has access to technology resources to enhance visuals and make content language and vocabulary more comprehensible. Teachers work with visuals, audio programs, manipulatives, media, and other tools and resources to support the learning. Teams of teachers in the Special Education department meet to discuss actionable alternatives for students depending on the present level of performance and Individualized Education Plan of each student. Scaffolding and process differentiation is considered in these discussions. Teachers work on strategies that are then shared with the Team. Ongoing discussion of the children’s work allows teachers to analyze and continue to explore options as needed to ensure that the learning is current and serving to move children toward meeting the language and content learning goals. When assessing content alternatives to paper pencil assessments (recordings, diagrams, speaking answers to a scribe, teacher observing the performance versus the child writing it etc..) are used and recommended to the team to ensure that what is being measured is not being hindered by the possible limitations of the learner in literacy. The teachers of ELLs with SWDs have implemented many of the following strategies offered in, "A Guide to Learning Disabilities for the ESL Classroom Practitioner," by Christine Root. 2018-19 CEP 85  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Based on the Citywide initiatives and Phase II, all SWD participate in flexible scheduling that affords them multiple opportunities to work according to their abilities in a least restrictive environment. Since the development of our last LAP, the staff has grown professionally to include a cohort of Special Education Teachers who are also licenses in ESL. These dual licensed professionals allow programming flexibility that was not always possible through the push in program. Therefore we are able to provide an ENL-SWD “class” with self-contained features at all times in the instructional program whether it be for the 12:1:1, 12:1, or Integrated Co Teaching (ICT) setting. In these groups the ESL servicing periods delineated in CR Part 154 are taught by a teacher that is a Special Education and ESL licensed professional and therefore knowledgeable in the techniques to support and ESL-SWD student. Children in this group are also not limited to full day programs, this varies according to their needs. An example of this program is the child may be restricted in 12:1:1 for Literacy 10 periods of their week, have 5 periods of Mathematics, 3 periods of Social Studies and 3 periods of Science in Integrated Co-Teaching and receive Art, Physical Education, Computer Technology, Word Study/Phonics in General Education. Given the Citywide initiatives, this group of students is held to the Common Core Standards that all students are however, teachers make decisions on a students by student basis to pull children into small groups for reinforcement. Additionally, options for support with a Special Education teacher are provided when needed without having to resort to moving the child to the more restrictive environment completely. An example of this is an ICT (Special Education) teacher is mapping the lessons in the next math unit that will include multi step multiplication problems She knows that two of her SWDs do not know multiplication facts or how to resolve them through repeated addition. In order to scaffold the learning the teacher requests that the student join the first period mathematics self contained group where the SE teacher is working on computer multiplication using an interactive board where the children can move the items to form groups in specific factors. The student joins that self-contained Special Education group for a week and exits after the “intervention” to join his Special Education ICT teacher to begin working on the language of multistep problems only now he has a working knowledge of grouping to solve multiplication through repeat addition. The students IEP goals are revisited throughout the year to ensure that the child is on target to meeting them. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention Program for ELA, Math, Other Content Areas Intervention services are offered in ELA and Mathematics to ELLs who are at risk of not meeting promotional standards, were retained in the grade, and/or scored at or below Level 2 in ELA and/or Math. English Language Arts Tier I intervention is done by the classroom teacher for at-risk students in English. This intervention consists of small group, needs based, goal driven support in 8 to 10 week cycles. During this time the classroom teacher teaches literacy and/or content strategies to support mastery of skills. Pre, mid, and post assessments serve as benchmarks toward mastery by identifying markers of progress and mastery of the designated goal. ELLs who scored at or below Level 2 on the New York State ELA test in 2018, and students who are holdovers or were identified as possible holdover in the previous school year, participate in a Push in/Pull-out program that is skills specific. The students’ needs are identified through assessment and intervention is provided in specific skills through intensive cycles of 8 to 10 weeks (Tier II). After which, student progression is discussed by the provider, classroom teacher, and the Academic Intervention Team in order to evaluate the need for continuance. Small group instruction provided during the school day in a separate location for 50 minutes, 2 sessions per week. intervention is provided using the Scholastic Guided Reading Program which focuses on the comprehension strategies critical to grade, addresses phonemic awareness and phonics gaps, and builds development of fluency skills into each lesson./or Reading and ESL teachers work with these students in small, differentiated groups scaffolding instruction and building upon skills lessons taught by the classroom teacher. Students are taught strategies to address each skill they are deficient in. Support is intensive during the intervention cycle. Assessment is ongoing throughout each cycle to track progress and mastery of each goal. As students reach benchmarks, decisions are made as to the next steps in intervention which include: retaining support for subsequent cycle(s), reducing intervention back to Tier I at the classroom level due to marked progress, or seeking further intervention at the next tier level (possible Tier III). 2018-19 CEP 86  Long term ELLs, ELLs with a second or third extension of services, and ELLs (4 – 6 year) who have remained at the same proficiency level for a second year, and ELLs who scored at or below Level 2 on the New York State ELA in 2018 are identified for intervention services in a two hour a day after school, twice a week Title I program and/or Title III Supplemental program on Saturdays for 3 hours and 45 minutes from January to May. The goal of all interventions programs is to provide differentiated instruction in a small group setting where the reduced student to teacher ratio allows for multiple opportunities for interaction amongst students to develop auditory, listening, and vocabulary skills around content. Active engagement and dialogue around content being learned allows students to build academic language and achieve higher levels of understanding of concepts taught. Curriculum is challenging and level appropriate. The methods by which the standards based instruction is delivered is varied, differentiated, and goal driven to enable a match between what is being taught and the student’s ability to comprehend. Mathematics Early intervention begins at the classroom level in Tier I support. Teachers analyze student data to identify skills deficiencies and build a 10 week cycle of intervention. Students work on a targeted goal during the cycle with the teacher providing small group strategy based intervention. Students are assessed at three points in the cycle to document progress and mastery while conferences serve to assist teachers in track and/or modify the plan for the group. Once the cycle is completed, students are assessed to verify mastery of the goal. Subsequent decisions are made for the next cycle based on the results obtained in the data. ELLs who were found to be performing below level 2 (State Mathematics Spring 2017), and students who are holdovers or were identified as possible holdover in the previous school year, participate in a pull-out program that is skills specific. Similar to ELA intervention, students’ needs are identified through assessment and intervention is provided in specific skills through intensive cycles of 8 to 10 weeks (Tier II). After which, student progression is discussed by the provider, classroom teacher, and the Academic Intervention Team in order to evaluate the need for continuance. Small group instruction provided during the school day in a separate location for 50 minutes, 2 sessions per week. Additional intervention is provided from November to May for 1 hour and 50 minutes sessions one day per week in an after day school session. Teachers work with small groups of students to further develop skills reflected in the data as weaknesses. A Saturday program provides students performing at Level 1 and 2 with targeted instruction specific to needs identified in interim assessment item analysis. This program runs from January to the end of April each Saturday for 3 hours and 45-minute sessions of which 1 hour and 30 minutes is dedicated to mathematics skills building and strategy instruction. During the school day, Ells who failed to reach level 3 on the New York State Mathematics Exam in 2017 participate in the Title I Math program in intervention cycles of 10 weeks. Title I personnel use differentiated methodology, strategies, techniques and materials that provide children with varied opportunities to manipulate skills and reach mastery in skills specific cycles. The intervention cycles are taught using the Go Math! RtI Intervention kit. Pre-tests, checkpoints, and post-tests that help teachers to assess progress. ELLs are identified for Math intervention based on performance and at risk status not language proficiency. Language proficiency levels are considered when teaching and instructional adjustments are made to support the content vocabulary and concept learning. Ells whose years of service are 0 – 3 are usually Tier I intervention at the classroom level with additional content and language support being provided by the ESL teacher. All Ells independently of language proficiency and years of service are invited to participate in after school sessions. Science / Social Studies Targeted students are provided with differentiated instructions and assessed on an ongoing basis to note progress and needs for further intervention within targeted skills. Tier II intervention includes students in Grades 4 -5 identified as performing at a level 1 through the State Science test. These students receive small group instruction for 45- minutes during the school day once per week. Built into the extended day AIS program is an additional component for Science skills and vocabulary instruction to support those students who are taking the Grade 4 Science test in 2018. Intervention services are all offered in English. Only Tier I intervention in the TBE classes are offered in Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The Pearson's ReadyGEN ELA schoolwide program is in each of the ESL and TBE classes and is the source of ELA instruction expanding upon the rigor the school has already been working on through Social Studies and Science. Through this program the instructional program has shifted to include: reading a balance of 50% literary and 50% informational texts; students 2018-19 CEP 87  building content knowledge through text by reading and writing across curriculum that complement the content standards in Science and Social Studies; includes a growth complexity in the text the children are reading in order to be prepared for the demands of college and career; building on academic vocabulary that transfers from year to the next; students reading closely and grasping information, arguments, ideas, and details based on text evidence and; writing from sources with emphasis on evidence from text. The school will continue the programs with the continuation of the NYC DOE Passports Social Studies program which incorporated authentic texts in the instructional materials and the new Amplified Science program form K-5. (Spanish version for TBE classes.) The school will implement school-wide practices to increase the students' knowledge and understanding of high utility words on each grade level. In grades K-2, the school will continue to use the Wilson's, FUNdations program. Based on the analysis of the Spring 2018 F& P reading levels in the lower grades, an emphasis on the Wilson's Fundations's program is being made for the 2018-2019 school year in addition to the use of literacy/ language based thematic centers. The school looked at data from the ELA and the students' work in writing and found deficits in both mechanics and development of writing. In order to support the students in the area of writing, PS 152 will begin to utilize the Schoolwide Writing Fundamentals as the writing program grades K-5. In Mathematics P.S. 152 had already implemented the use of a Common Core rigorous program in the 2012 – 2015 school years through Go Math! This program is will continue in the next year. PS 152 began using the on-line digital Literacy Program, MyOn in 2014-2015. The school will continue to utilize the program which allows the all ELL and EP students to access interactive texts at matched independent reading levels . Texts are also available in Spanish. PS 152 has implemented the iReady diagnostic program which also includes leveled learning activities in both ELA and Math for grades K-5. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No services/programs are being discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners have access to all programs available in the school. Curriculum and instruction is varied in order to consider their language goals but, the content, scope and sequence, curriculum, and standards are specific to the grade they are in. Access to the grade specific curriculum is ensured through differentiated instructional techniques that take into consideration their language needs. As previously stated, ELLs participate in all academic intervention programs as needed. The school-wide AIS program is a pull-out program to provide targeted academic intervention in Math and ELA. Children are identified at-risk based upon state scores, and school-wide assessments which include the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment System Running Record and the Houghtom Mifflin, Go Math assessments. Once a child is identified, a parent letter is sent home, in the preferred language if possible, and services are provided. All students are entitled to AIS services if identified as such, including ELLS. Grades 4 and 5 take part in the Schoolwide Enrichment Model. All students, including ALL ELLs are invited to take an interest survey and are allowed to select one of the Interest groups that include but are not limited to Mask making, book making, and theater. All classess in grades K-5 partake in Project Arts with resident artists. The administration schedules all classes at least once a year to work with an artist. ALL ELLs take part. The school works with, “Dancing Classrooms,” and schedules all fifth grade students to take ballroom dance classes which culminate in a performance. ALL ELLs participate. Every class votes for two students to be a part of the Student Council. All ENL classes participate, therefore, assuring ELL representation. Title III Afterschool programs are offered to all Ells in grade 3 – 5. Afterschool sessions that focus on ELA and Math meet two days per week from 3:10 to 5:00 from November to May. The Title III Saturday programs take place from January to May from 8:00 to 11:30 and focus on both ELA and Mathematics. By combining Title I funds, we are able to provide a program that includes transitioning Ells who have just reach proficiency in the last two years. ELL students that are identified as At-Risk are 2018-19 CEP 88  the first to be invited to attend the after-school and Saturday school programs. Parent letters are sent home, in the preferred language when possible, to invite the child to attend the supplemental programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials are provided to each class independent of the language level of the class. Teachers follow the New York City Scope and Sequence to map out topics and units. ESL and Bilingual Teachers develop their lessons in accordance with this starting point and adjust instruction to meet the language needs of the students. ELA: Grades K – 5 ReadyGen (Pearson) for Reading supported by leveled libraries for independent reading (also available in Spanish for the TBE classes). Literacy By Design Guided Reading and Scholastics Guided Reading Prgram, Supplemental materials Newcomer kits; Measuring Up to the New York State Common Core, ELA; Reading A-Z computer license for e-books and instructional support; Raz Kids site License, MyOn on-line Literacy Program site license, Curriculum Associates, Ready: CCLS Reading. iReady Writing: Schoolwide Writing Fundementals, Ready: CCLS Writing. Phonics: (Primary K - 3) Fundations (Wilson) (La Cartilla for TBE classes) Mathematics: Grades K – 5 GoMath! with Teach Central interactive lessons supports; and Measuring Up to the New York State Common Core -Math, Curriculum Associates, Ready: CCLS Math, iReady Science: Grades K – 5 Science (Harcourt) with manipulative stations and materials for hands on experiments and experiences. The school will be implementing the new Amplified Science program in September, 2018. Social Studies: NYC DOE Passports, Grades K – 5 Social Studies (Houghton Mifflin), Intervention ELA: Scholastics Guided Reading Program Intervention Math: Go Math RtI E-books and software programs such as E-Pathways and Scholastics' Fast Math serve as supplemental materials and BrainPop instructional provide media for enhancing instruction used selectively and in accordance with the students' tiered goal plan. Every classroom (53) in the building have SMART boards to provide interactive lessons and display. All classes in Grades 3 – 5 have computer carts with 24 to 36 stations group lessons. iPads are also available and currently part of a pilot intervention program for the 2017 – 2018 school year. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? HLA is an integral instructional component of each TBE class. Supplemental literacy is available in the HL for these students. The school follows the mandated periods of home language instruction in the TBE classes. In additional where possible materials available in multiple languages are purchased for ELLs in general education and self-contained ESL classes. Dual language dictionaries are also purchased for students that are dominant in a language other than English. GoMath!, Social Studies, and Science content libraries are available in the TBE classes in the native language. These materials are utilzed to meet the mandated number of minutes of home language instruction. The school is currently looking at alternatives to meet the NLA needs in the TBE classes since the ReadyGen ELA program is not available in Spanish. The on-line literacy program, MyOn does have texts available in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources correspond to the age and grade of the ELL. In some instances in which an ELL has been retained in the grade this may vary but these are exceptions. Concepts, books, materials, curriculum is not simplified for students. Rigor requires that we support the student to rise to the anticipated curricular level, not the contrary. The only material that a student uses that may be at a level below the anticipated grade is their Independent reading text from the classroom library. 2018-19 CEP 89  The reason for this is that reading is taught using a developmental leveled system and if the child is not reading on grade level, he is building stamina and skills to read on level and can only do so at their independent level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. Instructional materials are provided to each class independent of the language level of the class. Teachers follow the New York City Scope and Sequence to map out topics and units. ESL and Bilingual Teachers develop their lessons in accordance with this starting point and adjust instruction to meet the language needs of the students. ELA: Grades K – 5 ReadyGen (Pearson) for Reading supported by leveled libraries for independent reading (also available in Spanish for the TBE classes). Supplemental materials –On Our Way to English libraries and Newcomer kits; Measuring Up to the New York State Common Core, ELA; Reading A-Z computer license for e-books and instructional support; Raz Kids site License, MyOn on-line Literacy Program site license, Curriculum Associates, Ready: CCLS Reading. iReady Writing: Schoolwide Writing Fundamentals, Ready: CCLS Writing. Phonics: (Primary K - 3) Fundations (Wilson) (La Cartilla for TBE classes) Mathematics: Grades K – 5 GoMath! with Teach Central interactive lessons supports; and Measuring Up to the New York State Common Core -Math, Curriculum Associates, Ready: CCLS Math. iReady Science: Grades K – 5 Science (Harcourt) with manipulative stations and materials for hands on experiments and experiences. The Amplified Science program in K-5 will be used in September of 2018. Social Studies: NYC DOE Passports, Grades K – 5 Social Studies (Houghton Mifflin), Intervention ELA: Intervention by Design (Rigby) Scholastic Short Text Intervention Math: Math Navigator (America’s Choice) E-books and software programs such as E-Pathways and Scholastics' Fast Math serve as supplemental materials and BrainPop instructional provide media for enhancing instruction used selectively and in accordance with the students' tiered goal plan. Every classroom (53) in the building have SMART boards to provide interactive lessons and display. All classes in Grades 3 – 5 have computer carts with 24 to 36 stations group lessons. iPads are also available and currently part of a pilot intervention program for the 2018 – 2019 school year. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newcomers are defined as English language learners who are newly enrolled in the school. Upon arrival parents in this group are given the opportunity to meet with the Parent Coordinator and the ENL Coordinator for an orientation. The parent is provided with a parent handbook, a school calendar, and other pertinent information in the native language (if available). If the child is entering school on or before October, parents are invited to attend Back to School evening where the teacher discusses curriculum and expectations for the school year. Interpreters are available during the evening to provide support as needed. Students are welcomed to their new class by the ENL Coordinator. Set-up packages are available with activities for the child to begin the integration process. Activities highlight the individual student through pictorials and give the child a recount of the school and the class. Teachers provide the students with a partner to support and guide the student through daily routines. Whenever possible, the partner speaks the native language of the newcomer. If a partner who speaks the same language is not available in the class, one is provided from another class for a few minutes each day for a period not to exceed 10 weeks. Each class is equipped with a “Newcomer Kit” that provides for instruction on vocabulary that is essential for school. During literacy, teachers will use these books and materials to support new learners in small group lessons. The guidance counselor meets with newcomers to assure that they are adjusting and that their social-emotional needs are being met. The teachers utilizes the parent engagement time to meet with the newcomer parents to support them and their children. 2018-19 CEP 90  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Through Project Arts funding, the students of P.S. 152 have worked with Art residents in the interdisciplinary study of the Arts aimed at increasing literacy. Experiences provided through the Enrichment Model and Project Arts were combined to produce artistic performances as a celebration of all forms of learning (visual, expressive, spatial, movement, etc…). Dancing Classrooms. the ballroom dancing program is offered to all of the fifth grade students, including ELLs. This School Enrichment Model (SEM) motivated by the philosophy of Giftedness developed by Renzulli, includes Clusters of Grade 4 and 5 students participated in creative project based inquiry developed on the guise of children’s interests beyond curriculum. Clusters were interest-based groups of 8 – 12 students engaged by a teacher who served as facilitator. Clusters took on a role and function that was unique and purely developed by the students’ ideas for furthering a concept, thought, trend, practice, a movement. Project based learning and curriculum compacting will expose learners to instruction aimed at raising the level of thinking and exploring levels of gifted behaviors. English Language Learners participate in SEM as do all students 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Professional Development (PD) plan for Ell personnel is an changing document. Several of the Professional Learning Community workshops on Monday afternoons are designated for professional development for all staff members in the area of ENL mandates and instructional support for ELLs. The entire scheduled staff, including all teachers, paraprofessionals, and guidance counselors, attend the school-wide PD on ELLs. Workshops may include, but are not limited to, having ALL teachers identify the ELL students that they work with and best practices to support their needs. The psychologists, Speech and OT and PT therapists are provided professional development during the 50 minute blocks within the school day on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Secretaries and the Parent Coordinator meet with the administration and the ESL coordinator for professional development regarding Part 154, the LAP/LIT and other areas of interest for the ELL population. The assistant principals attend professional development workshops on ENL through the NYC DOE Borough Field Support Center, and by attending workshops that are offered through the Council of Supervisors and Administrators and the CSA, Executive Leadership Institute. Professional learning sessions are built in to include the mandates sessions of training on ENL methodologies and addressing each of the content areas as well as literacy. Teachers attending PD are given the support to understand the CCLS and work together to assure that all standards are being met. Teachers are also attending training provided by Pearson on the ReadyGen program. In house sessions also include 3 hours of training each month to meet the requirements of the Teacher Evaluation System. Intervisitation and needs specific training is also part of the plan. Additionally there is a Technology is in Phase II of a complete technology restructuring therefore as part 2018-19 CEP 91  of the plan for technology there are sessions dedicated to instructional technology for Ell teachers aimed at enhancing instruction and targeting ells through media and interactive technologies. Common Core Learning Standards training professional development has been ongoing since the 2012 – 2013 school year. Sessions have included guiding teachers of Ells on how to plan differentiation of process that can make rigorously content available to all children. Teachers explored the Universal Design toolkit and used the techniques to develop units aligned to the Common Core. They implemented the units and revisited the techniques used in order to modify and add. The teachers meet for PD sessions where they explored each of the parts of the Common Core and compared the progression of the document and how it differed from existing structures and curriculum. ReadyGen training is ongoing as teachers explore methods by which to scaffold for the deeper text and thinking required for the Ells to reach the rigor required by the program. Additionally as the year goes on study groups are formed based on the specific areas of literacy the teachers choose to explore further. The ENL instructional staff is also provided with ongoing support to increase their content area expertise in Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. Each teacher is a part of a Teacher Inquiry Network to further develop their expertise on instructional methods and strategies that can support learners. Extensive professional development during the Professional Learning Community meetings on Mondays and during block consisting of 2 periods of 50 minutes each per week will include literacy development training. Training on Differentiating of instruction to meet the language needs of students is achieved through a thorough analysis of the data specific to language proficiency, literacy, and ongoing data collection is a priority for the 2018 - 2019 school year, as well as, perfecting questioning to challenge learners at their progressive levels. This training is ongoing throughout the school year. Based on our needs assessment and the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessment the Title III Professional Development program also focus’ on workshops that lead to the overall improvement of ESL and content instruction through differentiated needs based instruction. The teachers providing instruction in the program will partake of monthly data analysis. During this time they will discuss data results and analyze each item for strengths and weaknesses connected to each of the language strands. This will enable them to make decisions as to the next steps to follow on the instructional continuum. Additional sessions in professional development for Title III will include: Building a better understanding of differentiated instruction and how to use this technique to address academic and linguistic needs. Developing academic discourse through experiences, discussion, listening, describing observations, reading graphic representations, and writing about what the learn. Developing mathematics literacy through discussion, application, and analysis of alternative paths to problem solution. How to make students active learners through teaching strategies. It is expected that learners that become skilled at how to use a strategy effectively, will replicate the process when given other tasks. Continued study of the learning standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Mandated hours of professional development in strategies for teaching English Language Learners is provided by the Assistant Principals and the English as a New Language Coordinator (all State certified in ESL). Scheduling structures have allowed for three 50-minute period blocks per week dedicated exclusively to professional development. Additional professional development in offered during the one hour and twenty minute Professional Learning Community block on Monday afternoons. The Professional Learning Community Team ensures that 50% of the PD sessions in the year will address English as a Second Language teaching strategies for ENL and TBE teachers. 15% of the PD sessions for the General Education teachers and other staff members will be specific to ELL topics. Special Education Teachers attend 3 additional sessions with the Special Education supervisor / Assistant Principal (Certified in Supervision of Special Education, ESL and Bilingual Programs as well as experienced in teaching Ells / TBE) on prevention and intervention and ESL methods. In these sessions, training will include analysis of language acquisition and assessment data and strategies for addressing weaknesses and strengths in the findings. 2018-19 CEP 92  The School Professional Development Plan outlines all dates, time, and topics for Mondays' Professional Learning Community workshops. Weekly schedules for the 50 minute professional development blocks are planned on a bi-weekly basis. The Assistant Principal files all Agendas and attendance sheets in a Professional Development data binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All teachers of ELL student are required to hold an annual meeting regarding their child’s language development. This meeting is held in addition to Parent Teacher Conferences. Teachers schedule annual meetings with the parents of their ELL students during their prep periods, before or after lunch, or during Parent Engagement time. The administration provides a period of time in which all ENL teachers must conduct their Annual Meeting with the parents. The school hires translators for the meetings/training sessions, utilize parent volunteers to translate, and uses the DOE translation services. A professional development for the teachers is also provided before the Annual meetings take place with the parents. Involvement and Commitment of parents begins with feeling a sense of comfort in the building. With the assistance of the Parent Coordinator, events are planned throughout the school year to engage parents and peak their interest. Given the instructional shifts under the Common Core, training sessions during the 2018 – 2019 school year will continue to include developing an understanding of the demands of the Standards and the impact on the child. The parent / family is given the opportunity to receive the information during “Welcome Back to School” afternoon and during Parent – Teacher conferences. Parents also receive a monthly calendar of events to keep them informed of upcoming events within the school and the district. The Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the ENL Coordinator and the supervising Assistant Principal, provides parents with training in activities that can support their children as they learn a new language. Additional workshops are provided as children prepare for assessment, Science Fair, and other requirements. Parents are given information on immigrant support agencies, health agencies and facilities, and other organizations that can help support the soundness and wellness of the home environment. English as a New Language classes are also provided for parents with tips on supporting their children as they learn to read and write in the new language. The school hires translators for the meetings/training sessions, utilize parent volunteers to translate, and uses the DOE translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school makes every effort to have translators available at all events. Every parent of our ELL population meets with their child's teacher on an individual level to discuss their child's language development. The school continues to work to increase the number of parent involvement for the parents. Parents are more likely to attend a one on one meeting with the teacher if it is specific to their child than attend a workshop. Once or twice a month, teacher host parent workshops in their classrooms. Teacher use incentives to encourage parent participation. Teachers also host classroom celebrations around the curriculum for which they invite parents to attend. The school has noticed an increase of parent attendance to these types of events. Some examples of parent involvement activities include, but are not limited to, ENL classes for parents, parent workshops on how to help their child prepare for all state exams, FUNdations, and other early literacy skills, and how to incorporate math at home. We also rely on the Parent Association (PA) and the parents on the School Leadership Team (SLT) many of which are able to communicate in the native language of the parents in the community to gather information from their constituencies in the community in order to prioritize training sessions for the parents of Ells. The Parent Coordinators plans and schedules many of the Parent Workshops with outside organizations and agencies. School staff and parent volunteers are used for translation at parent workshops. Additional translators are hired as needed. 2018-19 CEP 93  The most successful parent involvement activities we have is the Scholastic Book Fair and the PA meetings where individual children are recognized as "Student of the Month." Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 94 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Vincent Vitolo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 95  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 152Q School DBN: 30Q152 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Vincent J. Vitolo Title Principal Enid Maldonado Assistant Principal Wanda Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Kelsy Coba ENL/Bilingual Teacher Choeyin Tashishar Parent Ester Lim Teacher/Subject Area Renee Sciacca Teacher/Subject Area Maria Bonacci SAri Madden Coach Coach Daniel Stegner School Counselor Dr. Philip Composto Yeung Gar Yan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member QPN Elizabeth Economakos Other Assistant Principal N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 6/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 96  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q152 School Name: Gwendoline N. Alleyne School Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Wanda (Primary LAC) Alameda Parent Coordinator Yes Elizabeth Economakos AP No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Translation needs are assessed based on the percentage of recent immigrants registering students in P.S. 152Q. during the 2017 – 2018 school year. The Home Language Identification Surveys are a source of information used to identify the language spoken at home as well as the selection of language preference indicated by the parent at the time of registration. We specifically look at Part 1, item 5, “What language is spoken in the child’s home or residence most of the time?”; Part 3 under Parent Identification: “In what language would you like to receive written information from the school?”; and “In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?”. Teachers and schools staff also collect data from the students' blue cards.ATS reports for HL and preferred languages are periodically reviewed by the pupil personnel secretary. Changes are made during the school year based on parent requests so that language preference is as current as possible. 2018-19 CEP 97  The number of requests for interpreters during Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March also provide the school with current data. When notices are sent to the parent with each child’s report card, there are two selections made available for the parent’s convenience. The parent will at that time request an appointment for the parent teacher conference and also indicate if an interpreter is needed for the conference and the language of choice. Title II and Title I allocations are used to provide the services of interpreters not available via school personnel. In addition to language choice signing interpreters are available for hearing impaired parents. Requests for translated versions of the Home Language Identification Survey, Parent Program Choice letters and other forms pertaining to English Language Learners served as additional sources of data. Other factors considered in the need for translation included: • Individualized Education Plan (IEP) Team records. • Percentages of participation in meetings, workshops, and other school events • Data on the number of non-English languages indicated on the School Report Card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangla) Brahui Balinese Chinese DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN Hindi Korean Mongolian Mandarian Nepali English Punjabi 3 75 0 2 27 1 5 1 2 0 8 938 10 0.21 5.16 0 0.14 1.86 0.07 0.34 0.07 0.14 0 0.55 64.51 0.69 3 77 1 2 22 1 7 1 2 4 9 929 0.21 5.3 0.07 0.14 1.51 0.07 0.48 0.07 0.14 0.28 0.62 63.89 0.62 2018-19 CEP 98  Slovak Spanish Tibetan Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese 0 349 16 14 1 2 0 24 1.1 0.96 0.07 0.14 9 1 354 15 14 1 1 0.07 24.35 1.03 0.96 0.07 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Forms from the Department of Education that already include translated versions will be downloaded, copied, and distributed in the languages previously identified.Written translations of the following will also be included as these are produced in the school: • Parent handbook Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Upon preparing materials to be distributed, the school first accesses all NYCDOE translated resources (Existing templates from T & I.) For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or iFor school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. • School wide calendar of events 2018-19 CEP 99  September Monthly • Invitations to workshops, performances, School Enrichment Model celebrations and other events • Workshop handouts Ongoing basis throughout the year. • Curriculum requirements and promotional standards requirements Standardized test practice orientation materials January For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. (August) For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. (Documents submitted in the prior month.) For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. 2018-19 CEP 100  Information on the NYSESLAT January (Documents submitted in the prior month.) For school specific documents, the schools either utilizes the DOE T & I services or in house staff and volunteers to translate documents. (Documents submitted in the prior month.) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face- to face meetings include: • Two parent teacher conferences (Fall/Spring) The school follows the NYCDOE school calendar for parent teacher conferences and Parent night events. • “Meet the Teacher” (Fall) • “Spring Parent Meeting Night” (Spring) • Annual ENL parent meeting (Mid-Year) ENL parent meetings and Parent Workshops are scheduled throughout the year. interpretation service(s)? The school utilizes the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for phone and face to face conferences. The school utilizes staff and community volunteers to translate during parent workshops. The school hires interpreters for parent-teacher conferences, parent night, and other school-wide events. (For non-covered languages, the school utilizes technology resources and community volunteers.) The school utilizes the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for phone and face to face conferences. The school utilizes staff and community volunteers to translate during parent workshops. The school hires interpreters for parent-teacher conferences, parent night, and other school-wide events. (Teachers use the phone resources for face to face meeting. Documents are submitted at least month prior for translation.) 2018-19 CEP 101  Promotion on Doubt Meetings for selected students (February) February Parent Workshops for selected parents on selected Tuesdays’ Parent engagement time. (All throughout the year) Informal: • Teacher -parent phone calls. • Guidance counselor outreach to parents • Grade supervisor outreach to parents Teacher, Guidance, and Supervisor outreach are on a needs basis. (For non-covered languages, the school utilizes technology resources and community volunteers.) The school hires interpreters for parent-teacher conferences, parent night, and other school-wide events. (Teachers use the phone resources for face to face meeting. Documents are submitted at least month prior for translation.) (For non-covered languages, the school utilizes technology resources and community volunteers.) The school hires interpreters for parent-teacher conferences, parent night, and other school-wide events. (Teachers use the phone resources for face to face meeting. Documents are submitted at least month prior for translation. Technology resources are also utilized.) (For non-covered languages, the school utilizes technology resources and community volunteers.) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school first distributes all blue emergency cards in the preferred parent language to ensure that the correct information is on file in the event of an emergency. In the event of a school emergency, all staff members that have been identified as speaking a language that is needed to communicate with the parents will be utilized. Members of the BRT will have the "I speak," cards which will help students and family members identify their preferred language. The school messenger phone program, which sends a voice message to all parents, will have a message with important information with translations. The school will begin to implement Language Line for two way communication in the parents' preferred languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 102  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In the Fall, the entire staff will receive training from the LAC, which will include, but not limited to, the goals of the Chancellor's Reg. A-663, a review of the school's LIT, the NYC DOE Language Access Kits, and all information from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The staff will receive the Staff letter in the NYC DOE Language Access Handbook for schools and complete the School Staff Language Survey. Grade specific professional development will be offered for detailed information on the translation and interpretation services. The LAC will be available for further assistance for all staff members. The teachers will reach out to the LAC for assistance in translating documents for parents. Supervisors and the LAC will ensure that information is being communicated in the parents' preferred languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon the identification on the home language survey and/or a parent request is made to the school personnel, a determination will be made by the Translation / Interpretation Team whether it is one of the covered languages. Information will be logged in the child’s emergency card, ATS, and the Teams ongoing database. The parent choice ATS Report is printed and maintained on file for reference as needed. • The parent will receive written notification of the translation / interpretation services available to them in the school. • Postings near the main entrance to the school (in the multiple languages of the school community –Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Hindi, Punjabi, Arabic, Chinese, Tibetan, and Tagalog) will include information to parents on the Parent Room (105) where parents can obtain a copy of the written notification and the Chancellor’s Regulation A663 on translations. • The school’s safety plan will include details on the procedures to ensure that parents who need language assistance, have access to the school’s administrative offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 152 will include questions on the annual Parent Need Survey to collect feedback on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. The school will begin utilizing Language LIne to conduct the needs surveys. The Parent Coordinator will serve as a liaison to share informal parent feedback with the school’s LAC and all other key staff members. 2018-19 CEP 103  Lastly, the LAC will consult with parent members of the P.A. and the S.L.T. to collect formative date on the school’s implementation of the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan. These parents will serve as a focus group representing all parents. 2018-19 CEP 104 
