2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q154 School Name: P.S. 154 QUEENS Principal: PAMELA GATHERS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Elementary 342500010154 Pre K-5 School Number (DBN): 25Q154 75-02 162 nd Street Flushing, NY 11366 718-591-1500 718-591-8751 Phone Number: Fax: Pamela Gathers-Bullard pgather@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Pamela Gathers-Bullard Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Karen Bracco Olga Espana Cindy King MagaritaHernandez N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, New York 11354 DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-391-6080 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5488 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Pamela Gathers-Bullard Karen Bracco Olga Espana Cindy King, Chairperson Margarita Hernandez RahatAlam Christy Ramirez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Laura Marmolejo Andrea Bruno DeiseKenny Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P.S. 154Q, we are dedicated to building a community of learners. Our mantra is "Access Creates Opportunity". Our mission is to engage all students in a learning environment that fosters a love for learning, teaches students to develop a passion and understanding for their community and provides students with the knowledge to be future leaders. We do this by embracing our cultural differences, supporting one another's creativity, developing ones’ self-awareness and employing a multitude of teaching strategies to help students become critical thinkers and life-long learners. By working collaboratively with parents, we will ensure that each child develops a love and a desire for 2018-19 CEP 9  reading, are able to write for multiple purposes, develop the ability to understand and solve mathematical problems, are capable of using and integrating technology into their work and experience the Arts. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 154Q is an Elementary School located in Flushing Queens. As a neighborhood school, P.S. 154Q services over 700 students across grades Pre-K-5. Public School 154 is a welcoming environment that services a diverse community of learners and families. The student body consists of 54% Asian, 22% Hispanic, 13% White and 7% African American. Our school is continuing to develop student confidence, career skills, interests and leadership abilities through enrichment activities, clubs, and programs such as our: Green Team; Basketball and Cheerleading Team; No Place for Hate Team, and The Select Choir. The school also offers a Theater Program for fifth grade students in partnership with the local middle school. Through this partnership, all of our fifth grade students are empowered and take on leadership roles in the production of our annual theatric performance. Roles fulfilled include the following: acting, lighting, sound, props, choreography and set design. The school also provides a range of enrichment and arts opportunities through our partnership with Education Through Music, CASA, Round About Theater Company, Cool Culture, Lego Robotics and Korea Taekwondo. These activities have not only engaged our school community, but have awarded us opportunities to participate and be recognized in Citywide Recycling Competitions and music events. They also provide an avenue for parent involvement and support in growing our children's abilities and interests Parents are important partners in our work to support all students. We will continue to open our doors to parents through invitations to concerts, award ceremonies, family nights, and curriculum workshops. The First Friday of the month parents will be invited to visit their child's classroom to participate in a learning activity. After the classroom visit, parents will be invited to the auditorium for a Parent Workshop that aligns with the classroom lesson to deepen their understanding of the content/strategy and provide the parent with valuable resources they could use at home with their child. In order to further support our school community, we have organized translation services to be offered at parent workshops and meetings. A new initiative for the 2017-2018 school year, is centered on the social- emotional well being of each student. The Youth Development Coordinator in collaboration with the Guidance Counselor, will offer parent workshops focused on topics, such as adjusting to middle school, coming from a single family home and raising a preteen. To ensure that we are supporting our students in meeting proficiency in the Common Core Learning Standards, we have closely examined our curricula and have implemented the Teacher’s College Writing Units of Study, as well as started the revision of our reading units of study. These changes were necessary to ensure that there is coherence in curricula across all grades, which will allow for a streamlined assessment source and cohesive observation of best practices. The work will target all population of learners in our student body and build upon the repertoire of reading strategies to also effectively target ENL and Special Ed. sub populations. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 11% of the students have an Individualized Education Plan receiving academic services in ICT or in a Self-Contained Classroom and related services such as Speech and Language, Occupational and/or Physical Therapy and Counseling. Data gathered from TC Assessments, indicate that students with IEPs and ENL learners are unable to meet grade level reading proficiency due the inability to think literally or inferentially about a text. These sub population of students would benefit from tiered approaches of teaching strategies and a modified curricula reflective of students’ on going assessment data. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, we have made the most progress in Collaborative Teachers. The key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is Rigorous Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q154 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 673 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 35 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 73.1% % Reduced Lunch 21.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 23.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 62 61 94.0% 9.2% 15.3% 9.2% 53.8% 2.5% 2 4% 6.4 61.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths are summarized below: Data Source – NYC Learning Environment Survey, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math Assessment Data  Teachers are equipped with the instructional resources to build students knowledge through content rich fiction and non-fiction literature.  Teachers have the materials needed to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help   students build strong foundations for learning. Students have access to resources that allows for them to interact with complex text, read a variety of literature and write about experiences grounded in text evidence. Students are able to deepen their conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context through rigorous instruction.  Based on the 2017 NYS ELA Assessment data, 50% of students in grades 3-5 are reading at or above grade level proficiency.  Based on the 2017 NYS Math Assessment data, 55% of students in grades 3-5 are performing at or above grade level proficiency.  Based on 2017 NYSESLAT data, ENL students are scoring higher in listening and speaking. 2. The school’s priority needs are summarized below: Data Source – NYC Learning Environment Survey, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math Assessment Data  Although students in grades 3-5 have been making steady progress over the past 3 years in ELA, only half of the student population is reading on or above grade level.  Based on the 2016 and 2017 NYS Math Assessment data, students are maintaining steady progress in mathematics.  Based on 2017 NYSESLAT data, ENL students are scoring lower in reading and writing.  Students’ lack the necessary tools to build on one another’s ideas or provide constructive feedback during class discussions. 3. Priority Need: 2018-19 CEP 13   Deepen student comprehension by incorporating strategies such as annotating during shared reading instruction and shades of meaning to develop academic language.  Deepen teacher pedagogy and teacher content knowledge through cycles of Professional Learning in Reading and Mathematics.  Establish a systematic approach for analyzing and utilizing assessment data as part of daily instruction.  Standardize assessment practices by ensuring that students are aware of the assessment criteria and are able to monitor their own learning.  Engaging teachers in professional development on using formative assessment for informing instruction and flexibly grouping students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will participate in professional learning geared towards the use of data to drive curricula and instructional decision making in order to deepen student’s critical thinking, build reading comprehension, conceptual understanding and problem-solving as evidenced by an increase of 20% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 from the Baseline Assessments using the F&P Benchmark Assessment, Grade 2-5 STAR Reading and Math Assessments and Grades K-1 Go Math Summative Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will incorporate formative and summative assessment data as part of their daily instruction by implementing the following assessment practices: Grades K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Administration and Teachers -Assessing for learning – Identifying skills and concepts that show students’ understanding using quick check questions, feedback, rubrics and checklist. -Assessing of learning – Identifying learning concepts that need to be met by the end of the lesson using tools such as learning targets, exit slips, feedback, performance tasks and rubrics. A revised Literacy Block will be constructed to support teachers with the implementation of: Grades K-5 September 2018-2019 -Targeted small group reading instruction – Guided Reading, Book Clubs, Strategy Groups, Leveled Literacy Intervention. -Engaging students in daily independent reading to build reading stamina, fluency and comprehension. -Daily shared reading instruction using annotations to closely read familiar texts to develop students’ understanding of foundational reading skills and build their reading comprehension. 2018-19 CEP 15 Grades K-5 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Teachers Gr. 5 Teachers and Administration September 2018 –June 2019 Administration and Teachers Grades K-5 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Teachers Classroom teachers will participate in professional learning to deepen content knowledge and pedagogy in mathematics. A shift in instructional practice will allow for teachers to engage students more frequently in problem-solving tasks to promote productive struggle and mathematical discourse. Math discussion prompts will be used to promote student talk and support students in their ability to reason mathematically. Grade 5 Math teachers will participate in Algebra for All Professional Learning to improve student skill and content knowledge. Participation in this Professional Learning will: -Deepen teacher content knowledge and impact student performance in Algebra -Strengthen and expanded pedagogical practice in Mathematics -Strengthen teacher’s capacity to serve as content experts for Mathematics. Thinking Maps will be embedded in the curriculum to support and deepen student content knowledge across all areas. Teachers will model making their thinking visible for students using Thinking Maps. Students will make their thinking visible using Thinking Maps allowing teachers to formatively and summatively assess student learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers/Grade Teams will develop and conduct workshops during Parent Engagement time and First Fridays that will focus on the Next Generation Learning Standards and Mathematical strategies between February 2019-April 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 16   Per Session – Administrators and Teachers  Human Resource – Classroom Teachers  Per Diem: Teacher Coverage  Instructional Technology – RAZ-Kids Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment 4 times a year November, January, March and June   Beginning, Mid-Year and End of Year Go Math Benchmark Assessment. Mid-Point Benchmark Goal - 10% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration of the STAR Renaissance Assessment in ELA and Math Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. 1. 1. The school’s strengths are summarized below: Data Source – 2014-2015 Quality Review, NYC Learning Environment Survey  The school has been recognized for its efforts to promote a positive learning environment, inclusive culture and student outcomes.  Teachers promote and celebrate with their students the importance of coming to school every day.  Teachers, students and parents feel safe inside and outside of the school building. 1. 2. The school’s priority needs are summarized below: Data Source – 2017-2018 ATS Student Attendance Data  The Parent Coordinator downloads attendance data from ATS student information system on a daily basis. This information is then transferred to an excel spreadsheet where daily phone calls are made to the families inquiring about the student’s absence. Parents are also contacted daily through our School Messenger System.  The school’s attendance data indicates that students are arriving to class late. In the first month of school, 15% of students arrived late at least once. First and second grade appear to arrive late to school most frequently.  According to the attendance data, the most common reasons for a child missing school was because they were home sick or away on vacation. Student absence was higher during the winter months. The data shows the following:  Month Absence September October November December January February March 13% 15% 19% 18% 28% 24% 30% 2018-19 CEP 18  April May 17% 24% 3. Priority Need: Based on a review of the most current qualitative and quantitative data, our priority needs to go towards raising student attendance.  The Social Emotional Team will work cooperatively to promote a healthy and active school environment that increases student’s wellness and attendance while improving student’s overall academic progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and attendance team members will implement a tiered system of attendance supports so that our attendance percentage shows a 5% increase as evidenced by the ATS report. The expectation is to inform and support parents with attendance policies and procedures in order to improve student attendance rates. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The 3 Bees Character Education Program (Bee Responsible, Bee Respectful and Bee Kind) will be used to promote academic success and Social Emotional Awareness. Pre-K – Grade 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Classes will create classroom charters reflecting on their roles and responsibilities as students. The Book of the Month will be used to promote the Character Education Program and students will reflect on the message of the stories. Character Education Assemblies will be used to promote student awareness and celebrate academic achievement. Quarterly 3 Bees Celebrations will be scheduled for the parents and students. Administration Guidance Counselor Youth Development Counselor Classroom Teachers Monthly attendance meetings will be held to monitor student’s attendance for absences. In an effort to reduce the rate data will be evaluated by monitoring: Pre-K – Grade 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Attendance Committee Total number of days absent for each student enrolled through the school year. Number of parental notifications sent. Number of parental meetings held to discuss absenteeism. Number of phone calls made to inform parents about their child’s absence. Monthly attendance meetings will be held to monitor student’s attendance for lateness. In an effort to reduce the rate data will be evaluated by monitoring: Pre-K – Grade 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Attendance Committee Total number of days late for each student enrolled through the school year. Number of parental notifications sent. 2018-19 CEP 20 Number of parental meetings held to discuss lateness. Number of phone calls made to inform parents about their child’s lateness. A mentorship program will be establish, where students with chronic absence and lateness will be buddied with a staff member who will serve as a point of contact for that child. Pre-K – Grade 5 September 2018 – June 2019 All Staff Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Creation of parent workshops to discuss morning routines and strategies for arriving to school on time and the importance of attendance in educational success. Target chronically late and absent students and families to create individual plans for increased attendance. Create a checklist for families and students to follow to help increase student attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly E-newsletter, ATS attendance data, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, Secretary, Attendance Teacher School Messenger - Communication system Student incentives Teachers -Parent outreach time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the attendance team will review school attendance data to review progress of chronically and severely absent students and overall school attendance percentage. Mid-Point Benchmark Goal - 2.5% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 comparison with 2017-18 ATS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths are summarized below: Data Source – NYC Learning Environment Survey  Teachers have four common prep periods a week that allow for time for teachers to do the following:  Talk to one another about instruction  Participate in vertical planning  Collaboratively design instructional lessons and unit plans  Conduct inter-visitations 2. The school’s priority needs are summarized below: Data Source – Principal Performance Review, School-wide Data System  On the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review, it was noted that we have deepened our work with teacher teams through collaborative inquiry.  Pre and post assessment data is entered on Google Drive, however teachers do not have the time or resources to dive deeply into the data.  Currently teachers are not able to use the Fall MOSL data to inform instruction. 3. Priority Need:  Teacher teams will use a data analysis protocol in order to identify and support students' needs in all content areas.  Teacher teams will engage in collaborative inquiry focusing on student writing, using assessment data to plan next steps and inform their instruction. Standardize assessment practices by ensuring that students are aware of the assessment criteria and are able to monitor their own learning through the use of rubrics and checklists. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 22  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in professional learning that includes vertical and collaborative teacher team inquiry which will result in a 65% of students increasing one proficiency level in reading comprehension, writing and mathematical reasoning. The studies from the professional learning communities will strengthen teacher practice therefore improving student outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 23 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Classroom Teachers All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Classroom Teachers STEM Teacher Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grades K-5 Teachers will participate in cycles of Professional Learning to deepen their content knowledge and instructional practice in Mathematics. Cycles of Professional Learning will include the following: -Unpacking the Next Generation Learning Standards -Developing instructional strategies, models and using differentiation to support student learning. -Developing and using problem-solving tasks. -Developing assessments and using rubrics. Content Based Writing Units of Study have been developed to ensure that all students are engaged in standard based instruction that focuses on Narrative, Information and Argumentative/Opinion Writing. Teachers will participate in writing Professional Learning Cycles to deepen their understanding of content area writing using: -Write from the Beginning and Beyond-Teacher’s College Writing Units of Study -Next Generation Learning Standards in Science and Social Studies -The Writing Strategies Book by Jennifer Serravallo Goal 4-Focus/Meaning and Goal 6-Elaboration. A daily 30-minute FOCUS period will be dedicated to support students in small group instruction. Following the model of 3 days for ELA instruction and 2 days for Math instruction. Grades K-5 Students October 2018 – June 2019 Administration Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 24 Teachers will work collaboratively to identify student population and their own areas of expertise to provide targeted instruction in the following areas: -Intervention -Enrichment -Social Emotional Students will transition between the teachers during this time. Assessment data and teacher recommendations will be used to identify students. Students will participate in a 9 week cycle of support. Kindergarten and First grade teachers will focus on developing early literacy skills using guided reading. Grades 2-5 teachers will target ELA through support and enrichment activities such as RAZ-Kids, NEWS ELA, Guided Reading, Book Clubs and LLI. Math supports include GoMath! Intervention for RTI, GoMath! Personal Math Trainer and Exemplars. Using a protocol for looking at students work, monthly grade level meetings will be used to analyze pre and post assessment data. Through these data dives, teacher teams will identify areas of strength, areas in need of strengthening and plan instructional next steps. Teacher team meetings and common preps will be used for planning, revising and refining curriculum maps as well as tasks designs and creating assessment tools. All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Administration Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Scheduling planned events every Tuesday during parent engagement time. Teachers will model collaborative practices during parent presentations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resource – Classroom and ENL Teacher  Per Session - Teacher and Supervisor  Per Diem: Teacher Coverage  Instructional Materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 25  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment 4 times a year November, January, March and June, Go Math Chapter Assessment and Pre/Post Writing Assessments Mid-Point Benchmark Goal 32.5% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STAR Reading and Math Assessments, Post Writing Assessments, Data Logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths are summarized below: Data Source – NYC Learning Environment Survey  Feedback from teachers indicate the following:  Administration sets clear vision for the school, expectations to promote student learning and that all programs are aligned to the school’s vision.  Administration shares a common understanding of how children learn best and sets high standards for learning.  Administration consistently has a pulse on learning by monitoring student data and tracking student learning.  Administration provides professional learning and participates in instructional planning with teachers. 2. The school’s priority needs are summarized below: Data Source – Principal Performance Review  The following is noted from the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review Strengthen teacher leadership roles.   Deepen teacher content knowledge through professional development.  Build capacity through teacher lead professional development. 3. Priority Need:  Continue supporting teachers with increasing rigorous math tasks and ensuring consistency of curriculum maps.  Continue to professional learning on using math tasks to deepen conceptual understanding and student discussion. Support teacher development of content knowledge through on going professional learning focusing on rigorous questions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 27  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all teachers will improve their rating in Component 3d by implementing effective assessment practices as measured by Component 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric score tracker in Advance. The Administration will use observation feedback to monitor assessment practices during instruction. The data collected will be used to organize professional development that will deepen teachers' content knowledge on assessment practices. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration will review Advance data and teacher feedback at the end of each observation cycle to identify instructional gaps in order to differentiate and modify professional learning activities based on teacher needs, with a focus on Component 3d. Inter-visitations and intra-visitations will be made available to teachers based on need determined by observations utilizing Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as well as the teacher observation selection. The Principal will provide teachers with peer observations templates for visiting and hosting teachers. Professional Learning opportunities will be made available to teachers based on teacher interest, school-wide focus and observations feedback. The Principal will provide teachers with a Professional Development exit slip to be posted on the PD board. Teachers will have the opportunity to share their professional learning on Turnkey Tuesdays. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Administration Teachers Administration October 2018 – June 2019 Administration Teachers Five to Eight teachers will be selected to serve as instructional leads. Through this leadership role team members will build their capacity to facilitate professional learning by: Teachers Administration October 2018 – June 2019 Administration Teachers -Leading instructional walkthroughs, inter-visitations and facilitate professional development to improve teaching and learning. -Serving as a Thinking Maps Trainer of Teachers for their grade. -Utilize a variety of protocols for goal setting and problem-solving related to analyzing student work. -Foster a classroom environment that is reflective of the school-wide goals and is a model for the grade. -Lead a team a teachers to build coherence, collaboration and alignment to school-wide goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will conduct instructional walkthrough with parent members of School Leadership Team using the Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and the Quality Review Rubric. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resource – Teachers  Per Diem: Teacher Coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-February 2019, 50% of the teachers will have achieved a 1-2 point increase in their preliminary teacher rating score of effective or highly effective of the Danielson Framework Assessment and Instruction in 3d as measured in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Advance rating in Danielson Framework – 3d Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths are summarized below: Data Source – NYC Learning Environment Survey, Attendance Sheets  Feedback from parents indicate the following:  Parents are given multiple opportunities to visit their child’s class by either observing or participating in instruction.  Parents receive ongoing communication on her their child is doing in class and on ways they could help their child.  The collaboration between the parents and school keeps parents informed about what is happening in school.  Feedback from teachers indicate the following:  The school community understands and supports the needs and concerns from parents.  The school community works closely with parents in order to meet the needs of the students.  The school community offers parents opportunities for parents to interact with their child in the classroom.  Dedicated evening events such as STEM Fair, Literacy Night, Cultural Cuisine and Curriculum Night) are organized monthly to strengthen the home school connection. 2. The school’s priority needs are summarized below: Data Source – Attendance Sheets  Data from the attendance reports show and increase in parents attending school events such as First Friday, Spring Fling and Winter Ball verses the amount of parents who attend Parent Workshops. 3. Priority Need:  Increase parent involvement in academic workshops to promote students achievement. Continue offering school-wide events to promote parent engagement opportunities for families. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% in the number of parents attending Parent Workshops, First Friday, and School Fairs as evidenced by parent sign in sheets. This targeted support will influence a change in student's performance by providing parents with the necessary tools to help their child at home. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom and Content Area Teachers First Friday sessions will be revised to focus on one topic for a three month cycle. Parents will visit their child’s classrooms and have the opportunity to learn alongside their child. All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 At the conclusion, of the classroom visits, parents will be invited to stay for hands on workshop learning about things they could do at home with their child. Translated support for parents in the following languages Bengali, Chinese, Spanish and Urdu will be available at these workshops. At the end of each of the three month cycles, the school will host a culminating celebration. The focus for the 2018-2019 school year are: -STEM – STEM Fair -Mathematics – Math Night Administration and classroom teachers will identify targeted students such as SWD, ENL and at risk students, and specifically invite their families to designated workshops that align with their academic areas of need. Through this, parents/families will be better informed on how they can support their children at home by utilizing targeted instructional strategies in order to increase academic performance. All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 The school will offer monthly workshops to support parents with the social and academic development of their child. All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Such workshops include but are not limited to the following: Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom and Content Area Teachers, ESL Teachers and Special Education Teachers Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Youth Development Coordinator -Internet Safety -Bullying -Using technology to monitor your child’s progress (Class Dojo, Remind) -Preparing for parent teacher conferences 2018-19 CEP 33 -Middle school selection process -Nutrition and Health Working in conjunction with the SLT, Administration will work collaboratively to design a Learning Environment Survey for parents to complete feedback on the effectiveness of school-wide events, workshops initiatives, and enrichment opportunities. Through this survey, families will be given the opportunity to voice specific interest and agenda items that they would like to see offered at P.S. 154. The data collected will allow for the team to identify and address specific needs voiced by the parent community. All Parents December 2018 – Administration Parent Coordinator January 2019 SLT Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Administration will host Coffee, Tea and Donuts with the Principal every 8 week, where there will be an open forum to discuss the progress we are making towards our school goals and to address any questions or concerns parents may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resource – Per Session/Overtime pay for staff members and Parent Coordinator for translation services Funding for Contracted Vendors – Workshops, Special Events and Translation Instructional Resources – Materials for parents, School Messenger, School Website and Refreshments Schedule Adjustments – Sub-coverage and schedule revisions for meeting/workshop facilitators.    Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent attendance at each school-wide event such as First Friday and Parent Workshop would have increased by 5% as compared to the 2017-2018 parent attendance logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey   Attendance record of parent participation at school-wide events. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -Leveled Literacy Intervention -Small group instruction During the School Day -Guided Reading -Close Reading -One to one computer based instruction as needed -Raz-Kids -Thinking Maps -Guided Math Groups -Go Math Intervention -Math Skills Group -Small Group During the School Day -One on one in classrooms -Guided Reading -Close reading of Science based non-fiction Small Group In Classroom During the School Day Small Group Pull Out Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -F&P Assessment -Baseline MOSL -STAR Assessment -State ELA scores -Teacher Referral Mathematics -State Math Scores -Unit Assessments -Math Tasks and Student Work -STAR Assessment -Teacher Referral -Unit Assessments -Student work -Science Tasks Science Social Studies -NYS Science Test -Thinking Maps -In-class formative and summative assessments -Running Record Data -Guided Reading -Close reading of Social Studies based non-fiction Tutoring -Small Group During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 36  -Baseline MOSL -Thinking Maps -Small group and individualized sessions -Small Group During the School Day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -State ELA scores -Teacher Referral -Information/ requests from teachers and families -Incident Reports -PPT/Teacher Referral 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have no Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. According to the 2017-2018 BEDS Survey, 100% of staff members at P.S.154Q are highly qualified teachers. New teachers are recruited through teacher referral and the Open Market Hiring System. Candidates are interviewed by administration and teaching staff where they are asked to analyze student work, provide demonstration lessons and feedback sessions. Professional development is ongoing for all staff members focusing on the Danielson Framework, Best Practices in Education and alignment with the school-wide instructional focus of Data Driven Instruction. Staff retention will be supported with time allotted for vertical team sessions once a month, specialized in supporting our Special Education and English as a Second Language teachers. Teachers will also attend professional development offered by the district or as expressed by an individual teacher seeking development in a specific area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers currently on staff are deemed Highly Qualified. The team will continue to support teacher growth through the Inquiry Process, Professional Development Opportunities and utilizing the Charlotte Danielson framework as a tool for providing feedback and identifying next steps and best teaching practices. This work will also support the school in retaining Highly Qualified Teachers. Paraprofessionals will take part in teacher PD sessions and city-wide PD session to support paraprofessionals. School administrators will engage in monthly Professional Development workshops provided by the District and the Office of Teacher effectiveness. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 40  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our preschool program uses aligned curriculum that is based on the PreK Common Core State Standards. Pre-K teachers participate in joint PD with the P.S. 154Q staff as well as teacher teams and study groups. Preschool parents are invited to attend all P.S. 154Q school-wide events and preschool students are included in these events. Student records, including early intervention services, will be shared in the spring as we prepare to transition students to Kindergarten classrooms. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our teacher leader team (a vertical team of teachers from PreK-Grade 5) analyzed all assessment measures and collaboratively determine the schoolwide assessment measures for the 2018-2019 school year. This team works to analyze assessment data, use results to improve instruction, collaboratively discuss data with their grade level colleagues, and work to communicate assessment results to parents on a regular basis. Our Data Specialist, school leaders, and PPT/RTI team regularly analyze assessment data in determining student support services and pedagogical needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 41  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 329,707.00 Title II, Part A Federal 84,425.00 Title III, Part A Federal 21,408.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 7,404.00 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) School Information Sheet Budget and Resource Alignment 5B and 5C School Information Sheet Budget and Resource Alignment 5C School Information Sheet Budget and Resource Alignment 5C School Information Sheet Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 42  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,746,147.00 X 5C School Information Sheet Budget and Resource Alignment 5B and 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 43   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 154Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 154Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 154Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 47  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 4 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: From reviewing the 2016-2017 NYSESLAT data, it is evident that over the past few years we have made significant progress with our English Language Learners. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to support our ENL students with a Title 3 supplemental instruction program that will take place twice a week on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The target population will be the Expanding level students. These students have been identified because after analyzing the 2017 NYSESLAT data, it was evident that majority of our students were performing at the expanding level. Students in grades 1 and 2 will attend the program on Wednesdays, and students in grades 3-5 will attend the program on Thursdays. Both sessions will run for approximately 12 weeks beginning in January 2019 and each session will be 2 hours in length. All classes will be taught in English by 4 teachers who each hold either an ESL License or a Dual License in ESL and Common Branches. There will be approximately 85 students participating in the program from grades 1-5 and students will be grouped by grade level. The students selected will be determined based on the 2017 NYSESLAT data. The program will be divided into two parts. One part will focus on building reading comprehension skills and stamina. The second part will focus on developing academic language. In collaboration, 4 ESL teachers will focus instruction on the use of academic language and the 4 modalities of reading/writing/listening/speaking using the NYSESLAT as a framework for their instruction. The ESL teachers will provide supplemental expertise in literacy acquisition. The Finishline New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core support book will be used as supplemental material for instruction during this program. ENL coordinator will organize and maintain attendance records for each after-school group along with copies of program notifications in parents preferred language. These documents are located in the ENL coordinators room in a file cabinet labeled by class. ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTION The students will also be participating in a Visual Arts program through our residency program with Learning Through Expanding Arts Program (LEAP). Here students will develop their language and vocabulary acquisition skills while learning about different art mediums and creating their own artistic expressions. Students will participate in one hour sessions weekly. BRINGING IT TOGETHER 4 ESL Teachers will work collaboratively to provide small group, expert instruction to our English Language Learners participating in the program. Students will participate in a well-rounded literacy program which brings in technology and the arts allowing students to break from traditional instruction into authentic and fun learning experiences which will serve as natural motivation and inspire engagement and stamina. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information On-going work will focus on Common Core aligned content area instruction as well as using the NYSESLAT as a framework. The residency will require students to develop their skills as listeners, speakers, writers, and readers. Research indicates that dance and the arts transcends language and supports English Language Learners' development. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL Teachers along with classroom teachers will participate in professional learning delivered by the district focusing on language, learning and literacy. Teachers will continue to work with Maryann Cucchiara, an independent consultant and researcher on developing academic language to support reading comprehension and to provide students with access to the content. Title III funding will be used to support teacher planning. All records and attendance sheets will be stored in the school-wide professional development binder. The district will be supporting schools with this professional development therefore it is at no cost to the school. ENL teachers work collaboratively with the classroom teachers weekly during common planning time to plan for instruction and provide multiple entry points for the diverse learners in the class. ENL teachers also meet with classroom teachers during Monday Professional Development Time to analyze student work and plan for instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to build a strong bridge between home and school through parent activities that support families to take an active role in their children’s learning and to put forth genuine effort to show respect for the culture the students and their families bring to our school, we will invite parents to participate in activities such as school trips, class/grade/school celebrations in curriculum and in culminating arts residency performances. ESL teachers and common branch classroom teachers will serve as the primary facilitators of the events listed above. Translation will be provided in writing and/or in person when available. Written communication is translated through the DOE translations services and translators are contracted out through an outside agency. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents will be notified via the school website, all-call system, flyers, PTA Meetings, and monthly First Friday with administration meetings. Agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents preferred languages will be stored in the school-wide professional engagement binder. First Friday visits take place the first Friday of each month from 8:15 AM-9:30 AM and provide parents with an opportunity to go into their child's classroom for about a half hour and learn alongside their child. This gives parents a chance to see what the teacher is working on with their children and gives them ideas on how they can support their children at home. After the classroom visit, parents are invited to the auditorium with the Principal, Assistant Principal, and Parent Coordinator where they can discuss or ask questions about what they observed in the classroom. A half-hour mini-workshop is then facilitated by the Principal or Assistant Principal around a specific topic connected to reading. Some of the topics include: "Ways to Support Literacy at Home", "How are children assessed in Reading?", "Strategies for before reading, during reading, and after reading to support comprehension", and "How can Parents Increase Their Child's Vocabulary Knowledge?" ESL Workshops, Curriculum Workshops (Fundations, Reading, Writing, Math) and Homework Workshops will be facilitated during the year during Tuesday Parent/Engagement time. Currently a parent survey is being conducted to determine additional parent needs so that we may plan to support them appropriately during the school year. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name P.S. 154Q Borough Queens School Number 154 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pamela Gathers-Bullard Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Samantha Stein Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Virola Teacher/Subject Area Katherine Barberio/ESL Related-Service Provider Caroline Bucchino Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Joanna Foulkes Coach School Counselor Cami Meyer Parent Olga Espana Parent Coordinator Mario Arciniega Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Valerie Kondilis/ESL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 10 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 675 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 148 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs we use Fountas and Pinnell running records as well as Fundations. ELLs are assessed on their decoding skills, reading accuracy, and their literal and inferential comprehension skills. The data shows us that our ELL students typically struggle with reading texts that are on grade level and have difficulty with comprehension. Many ELL students lack the vocabulary knowledge necessary to develop a deep understanding of the text. This reading data helps inform and drive our teaching as small groups are formed based on targeted areas of need. Our school's instructional plan and goal is to support our students with academic vocabulary, visual support, and real life connections. We also support our ELLs by providing as much prior knowledge as possible so that they can access higher level complex texts. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 58  Our RTI program is used to support students in small groups to develop their oral language and reading proficiency skills. Students are reassessed every 6 weeks. After students are assessed, adjustments are made to their instructional plan. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by analyzing various data assessments. We administer the Fountas and Pinnell running records assessment four times a year to monitor how students are progressing in reading skills and independent reading levels. We look to see if ELL students are reading at or above grade level or are making progress and moving up in independent reading levels. We also analyze the NYS ELA and Math data, as well as the NYC Performance Assessment tasks and look at the item analysis to see where students are succeeding and where the majority of the students are struggling to plan for scaffolded instruction. For each unit of study in ELA, science, and social studies, teachers administer a pre and post task to assess knowledge before the unit and how much progress was made after the unit. We use this data to evaluate the success of our programs as well. NYSESLAT data is also used to determine whether our programs are supporting our ELL students and their developmental language needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been reviewed students are supported through small group work in the classroom delivered by the classroom teacher. Students are also placed in AIS groups and receive intervention support from our Intervention Teachers. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] To gather a baseline assessment and analyze which students are below grade level standards, we administer the Fountas and Pinnell running records. We then carefully analyze the running records to determine a specific targeted skill that the child needs support in and form small groups to teach that targeted skill. Since many of our ELL students need language and knowledge of letters and sounds, we have them working with the Fundations Program. As part of the RTI Framework, ELL students who are far below grade level standards are also receiving RTI Tier 2 services 2-3 times per week in ELA instruction, as well as double-dose Fundations to strengthen their knowledge of letters and sounds. As teachers assess students during the year, we monitor and track the progress students are making. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSESLAT and the ELA June Instructional Support is used to evaluate student understanding and progress towards meeting assessment proficiency levels. Data gathered from this data dive is used to formulate an instructional plan to support our English Language Learners. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data dives are first conducted with the instructional cabinet and then teachers are engaged in data dives with lead teachers during professional development sessions and during weekly common planning meetings. School administrators distribute data to teachers prior to the meetings. Teachers also have access through the school's online data system. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 59  Instruction is organized for a predominately push-in co-teaching model for integrated ENL within ELA or content area and standalone ENL. Grade organization consists of two classes per grade that are predominately ELL learners (Entering and Emerging Students and Transitioning and Expanding Students), which allows us to maximize the amount of push-in time. Students who require additional service time such as newly arrived non-English speaking students and entering are also serviced in a pull-out model. The students participating in the pull-out model will be serviced for an additional period per day and the group size will not exceed 10 students per class. Our ELL program uses a heterogeneous push-in model with a focus on ELA within the science and social studies content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not offer any TBE programs at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not offer DL programs at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The majority of ELL students are placed in heterogeneously grouped classes on each grade. Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA. Transitioning and Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Within the push-in model, ESL and general education teachers co-teach for the Integrated mandated minutes per week for every grade. Articulation periods are provided to organize and plan instruction on a bi-weekly basis. ESL teachers also collaborate with classroom teachers during a common planning period and differentiate content area instruction in the areas of math, science, and social studies. All instruction is delivered in English. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development include: focus on tier 2 words, instructional conversation, scaffolding and implementation of other visual aids, and the use of technology. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When possible, we use staff members in the building to provide written or oral translations to students so that we can properly evaluate students. We also use translation applications on Ipads to support students individually in the classroom. To ensure that all ELLs are appropiately evaluated in their native language we provide them with the translated versions of the State exams, whenever possible. In addition, students have access to bilingual glossaries to support them in the content area. They also receive testing accommodations such as time and a half and a separate location. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction is offered for different proficiency levels of English Language Learners. Currently we do not have any SIFE students. However, in the event that we do get a SIFE population, we have tier II and III interventions such as double dose Fundations and Wilson Reading program. Newcomers and beginners are instructed using hands-on activities, alphabet charts, word lists, and teacher modeling to increase auditory and speaking skills. A supplemental intervention program has been designed for students who have been in the program for more than three years for former ELLs to provide them with targeted instruction in vocabulary and literacy instruction. The plan we have in place for the former ELLs is supported through the push 2018-19 CEP 60  in model and small group instruction (flexible grouping). The progress of these students will be tracked through interim assessments and teacher observations. In addition, former Ells are invited to participate in the spring early morning test preparation program as well as our Saturday Academy in order to support and prepare them for the State exams. Former ELLs will continue to receive 90 minutes of ELL instruction and support for 2 years after they reach the Proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. They will also be given the suggested testing accommodations such as separate location and time and a half as well. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials used by our teachers of ELL-SWDs include thinking maps, Wilson and Fundations methodology, leveled libraries including fiction and non-fiction, and technology. Students have access to content specific texts on a variety of reading levels, as well as translations in their native language. Students work in cooperative groups to engage in discussion and gain a deeper understanding of content. Academic vocabulary words are introduced and reinforced with picture support to grow students' vocabulary knowledge. Students are also supported through the use of Linguistic Frames to help them with speaking and writing. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by grouping our students in each grade level, pushing into the classroom, articulating with the classroom teacher and special education teacher in order to adapt and modify lessons based on students' needs. Students with disabilities are flexed into general education classes based on their academic abillities and strengths. ELL students with disabilities are placed in ICT classes if their recommendation is such. Students are continuously supported through small group instruction providing them with targeted supports and scaffolds. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In addition to the aforementioned interventions, teachers meet on grade level inquiry teams and analyze student work to assess whether their teaching is successful and whether revisions need to be made within their lessons. Part of the discussion during these team meetings is to analyze the work of ELL students to reflect on how their teaching is or isn't supporting this specific target population. If it isn't, they work to plan supportive strategies to make sure ELLs are able to access the content and curriculum. Our Title III Program for students in grades 1-5 also offers additional support as do art residencies in helping our students aquire language skills. We also have a music program which provides our ELL students with another outlet and way to learn the English language. Many of our beginner ELL students are receiving instruction on letter sounds and vocabulary acquisition to help them decode words during the RTI period. All programs are conducted in English. Our targeted supports include LLI, SPIRE, Double Dose Fundations, Personal Math Trainer and GoMath Reteach. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Technology will continue to be incorporated into all of our ELL classrooms through the use of the smartboards which were installed in about 96% of the classrooms in the building and utilitzation of the Ipad cart and laptop cart. We will continue to implement the Fundations Program for grades K-2 and for beginner ELLs which supports letter sound acquisition and fundamental knowledge of the English language system. In addition, we will continue to offer our Title 3 Program to support our ELL students. Next year, we will also support our ELL students through the use of String work and number routines to build students' number sense. Assessment data reflects that students need additional support in reading comprehension and word meaning. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? For this school year, we do not anticipate any program cancellations. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 61  Our ELL students participate in all school programs. These programs include but are not limited to: Circle of Dance, where students learn various movement and dance techniques, Music for Many, where students learn about acting and perform a mini play, educational assemblies to build cultural knowledge and awareness, basketball and cheerleading teams, student council which helps to bring change to the school based on student voice, green team which leads the school in recycling efforts, and leadership programs such as the No Place for Hate Team led by the parent coordinator and the youth development coordinator which works to promote cultural diversity . Some of these programs require students to try out or apply by completing an application. All ELL students in grades 1-5 are also invited to participate in our after school programs. Students are grouped by Performance Levels and an invitation letter is sent home in the parent's preferred language. As mentioned above, all students receive targeted small group instruction to assist in acquisition of the English language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELL students: fiction and non fiction books on a variety of levels, trade books, Foss Science Kits, Words Their Way, Fundations, Wilson, Thinking Maps, smart board instructional support, and a social studies curriculum that is also supported by hands-on field trips. Cameras and color printers are used to capture images to support charts and other instructional aspects of the classroom. Ipads and laptops for individual students are also used to support instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered through the use of bilingual dictionaries and small group instruction. Student translation services are implemented upon need. We also try to assign students in classes where the classroom teacher speaks the same language as the child. We also send home translated versions of DOE letters and school fliers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs’ ages, grade levels, and proficiency levels are considered when services and supports are rendered. ESL teachers also plan with grade level teams and align their support services to the Common Core Standards for the grade. The ESL teachers are responsible for making appropriate modifications to grade level curriculum so that ELLs can access age and grade appropriate material. The ESL teachers regularly attend Professional Development sessions and planning meetings with the teachers to make sure the resources they are using correspond to the appropriate age/grade level and support the curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are introduced to the ESL staff at registration and parents are provided the opportunity to tour the school with a member of the ESL Staff and Parent Coordinator. This tour provides parents and students with a chance to meet other teachers and students while gaining a brief understanding of the school community and curriculum. This year we will put together a team of students who will be the welcoming team for the school. This team will greet the new students as they enroll and show them places in the building that are important for them to know. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer Language electives at P.S. 154Q at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 62  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development and support for our school staff including assistant principals, ESL coordinators and teachers, common branch teachers of ELL students, paraprofessionals, OT/PT therapists, speech therapists, psychologists, secretaries, and parent coordinators will be provided by District-wide professional development as well as by a private consultant. The professional development plan will focus on how to support ELL students in meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards by incorporating various modalities such as visuals, videos, manipulatives, and providing concrete examples. In house professional development will focus on collaborative planning time between ESL staff and classroom teachers. In addition, ESL teachers share their knowledge and best practices of teaching ELLs during Professional Learning Community meetings. Teachers of ELL students participate in District-wide professional development in order to learn strategies to help ELLs meet the CCLS. ELL teachers have received professional development on academic language, text complexity, and close reading which support students in meeting the demands of the Common Core. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL teachers, administrative staff, and teachers that support ELL students meet on a regular basis to discuss best practices. ELL teachers will attend and/or receive through the turn-key process professional development from the District. Teachers meet collaboratively at least 1x/week to plan instruction and Vertical teams meet 1x/month to share best practices in supporting ELL students. We will continue to have an ESL teacher on our Teacher Leaders Team which meets twice a month to discuss data, look for trends, and plan for instruction to meet the needs of the students. During all Professional Development/Non-attendance days, time is set aside for teachers to share and turn-key professional development training. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept by the teachers for the grade level and vertical teams. School-wide professional development records are kept in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 154Q will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during the Tuesday Parent Engagement Time. If a parent is unable to attend during that time, the ESL staff will offer the parent a time that works best for them. As with all meetings, translation services will be provided by staff members or outside agencies depending on the preferred language of the parent. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents are kept in the ENL office and are organized by class. ENL staff members reach out to parents in multiple ways so that we ensure that parent needs are accommodated. ENL staff members meet with parents in person, make phone calls, and/or send home letters. Outreach is continued until meetings are held. We will continue to implement a parent involvement initiative inviting parents into their child's classroom the first Friday of 2018-19 CEP 63  every month to become an active participant in their child's learning. Administration hosts a monthly “First Friday" where parents are invited into their child's classroom for one period in the morning to participate and learn alongside their child in different subject areas. After this classroom visit, parents are invited to the auditorium for conversation with administration and the parent coordinator. This time provides parents with the opportunity to inquire about instructional and procedural items which can range from scheduling and curriculum to events at this school. Translation services are available by staff members or an outside agency if parents need it. A weekly parent email is sent to parents every week from the parent coordinator. This email also informs parents of the weekly events in our community. The parent coordinator also sponsors parent workshops and ELL training for adults. We also provide all parents a report card vocabulary sheet (in their native language) to help parents better understand the school report card so that they can assist their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pamela Gathers, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: 25Q154 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Pamela Gathers-Bullard Principal Joanna Foulkes Assistant Principal Mario Arciniega Parent Coordinator Samantha Stein ENL/Bilingual Teacher Olga Espana Parent Katherine Barberio Teacher/Subject Area Valerie Kondilis Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Cami Meyer School Counselor Danielle DiMango Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jessica Virola Other ESL Teacher Other Other 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 2018-19 CEP 66 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. 154Q Superintendent: D. DBN: 25Q154 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mario Arciniega Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A variety of data sources are used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. From running the RHLA and RSDS reports in ATS, analyzing the HLIS, sending parents a Language Preference Form in September in which they indicate the language they would like to receive written information and oral communication from the school, and meeting with parents at the beginning of the school year, we assess the number and types of home languages present within our school community. At the start of our school year, an ESL Parent Meeting facilitated by the ESL staff, in conjunction with the parent coordinator, is scheduled. At that time the staff discusses and informs parents of their options regarding the different programs that are available to their child. Videos in many different languages were created to explain the different options to parents. From listening to new parents and understanding our current population, we have multiple people available within the school who can serve as interpreters (Urdu/Pashtu, Spanish, Chinese, Hindi, French for example) and are available to parents. We also use multi-language stamps to communicate important messages and information to parents throughout the school year. Based upon parent feedback, certain documents are also sent to the Translation Unit to be translated prior to schoolwide distribution and phone calls are made to 2018-19 CEP 67  inform/remind parents of important information and events. Translators are also present at parent-teacher conferences for the most frequently-spoken languages in our school community based upon the RHLA, as well as through the DOE Translation Unit (for which is provided to all school personnel to use as a resource to communicate with families). We also have parents who volunteer to translate for other parents at our monthly meetings 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese-Mandarin/Cantonese, Bengali Russian Spanish Hindi, Urdu, Farsi, Pashto, Arabic Korean Vietnamese The parents' preferred languages for written communication include: English, Chinese/Mandarin/Cantonese, Bengali, Russian, Spanish, Hindi, Urdu, Farsi, Pashto, Arabic, Korean and Vietnamese 23.6% The parents' preferred languages for oral communication include: English, Chinese/Mandarin/Cantonese, Bengali, Russian, Spanish, Hindi, Urdu, Farsi, Pashto, Arabic, Korean and Vietnamese 23.81% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 68  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All translations are made through the translation unit. Families September and upon admission November and March Various times throughout the year March Parent handbook Parent-teacher conference forms After-school program information NYS testing dates distributed i 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent engagement time Parent-teacher conferences in plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translation provided by staff members Translation provided by Weekly September November 2018-19 CEP 69  First Friday Workshops March May Bi-monthly the translation unit Translation provide by school staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In staff provides translation support. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The first Monday in October Professional Development Time is dedicated to compliance and Chancellor's Regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A. PS 154Q is responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Parents/NewsInformation/BillofRights.htm. B. PS 154Q posts, in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance to the school, a welcome poster in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 70  Translated signs, in the covered languages, are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. C. PS 154Q will ensure that Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide are located in the main entrance lobby. D. PS 154Q school safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. E. Parents who speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section. F. The Department’s website shall provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be given to parents to gather feedback on the quality and availability of translation services. The Parent Coordinator will reach out to parents to also gather feedback. A focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school will be used to gather feedback and best practices on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 71 
