2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q157 School Name: J.H.S. 157 STEPHEN A. HALSEY Principal: VINCENT SURACI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Stephen A. Halsey 342800010157 6-9 School Number (DBN): 28Q157 63-55 102 Street Rego Park, New York 11374 718-830-4910 718-830-4993 Phone Number: Ms. Angela Lisa Fax: AAnconaLisa@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mr. Vincent Suraci Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Ms. Stephanie Sussman President: Ms. Vicky Barshai Chairperson position is rotated N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Ms. Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd, Jamaica, New York 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: 718-557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens/District 28 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ms. Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Queens, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Phone Number: Fax: 917-520-6743 718-281-3509 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Elena Aminova Ms. Liz Fisher Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6 Name Mr. Vincent Suraci Ms. Stephanie Sussman Vicky Barshai Ann Corda N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Mr. Feliks Kiliski Ms. Ariana Palacio Mr. Robert Plass Ms. JJ Rowe Ms. Cynthia Hoffman Ms. Patricia McGibney Ms. Shimona Shriki Mr. Francis Trainor Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Stephen A. Halsey is dedicated to preparing its students to become productive citizens by instilling in them a love of learning through enriched standard-driven curricula that incorporates cultural sensitivity and a respect for differences which will prepare them for future challenges via a committed partnership with parents and teachers. JHS 157 identifies its mission as follows:  To respect the students as young adults and, therefore, prepare them to be positive, productive adults and citizens of the 21st century.  To teach the students to recognize cultural similarities as well as to respect and to celebrate cultural differences.  To facilitate the affective as well as the cognitive development of our young adults.  To instill a love of learning in our children as well as to instill the desire to be lifelong learners.  To recognize that all students learn at different rates and in different ways.  To prepare for future challenges in high school and in college by requiring students to meet the Common Core Learning Standards.  To build self-esteem in our young adults, enabling them to withstand peer pressure and to develop decision making skills.  To acknowledge that parents and teachers are partners with a unified mission of ensuring our children’s success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Stephen A. Halsey, JHS 157 located in Rego Park, Queens is a culturally diverse learning community of educators, parents, and students. The school serves children in Grades 6-9. The building presently houses 1680 students. There are over 31 languages spoken by the students. The school maintains a dynamic environment, where the talents of the students- academic, artistic, and athletic are nurtured. Stephen A. Halsey School Strengths and Accomplishments: Stephen A. Halsey is dedicated to promoting academic rigor and excellence through a strong Common Core Learning Standard-based curriculum. Curriculum and instruction are areas of strength for the school. Strong collaboration between teachers in each of the content areas results in the creation of vigorous common core aligned curriculum and powerful pedagogical practices. Meaningful professional learning opportunities further support this focus. Another strength the school demonstrates is its use of data to differentiate and scaffold instruction for all students: English language learners, students with disabilities, and advanced students. Teachers work together to create Common Core aligned assessments, benchmarks, baselines, pre-tests, and post-tests. The data from these assessments is generated through the Achievement Series program. The Achievement Series program provides the teachers with item skills analysis reports. These reports inform the teachers of the students’ mastery of the Common Core Standards. The teacher teams in each content area use this data to drive their instruction. The Achievement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Series data and student work samples guide the standards addressed in the unit and lesson plans. This cyclical process is ongoing. Teachers administer baseline and pre-tests, use this data to inform their instruction, strategically teach, then measure student growth with post-tests and culminating projects. Stephen A. Halsey Strategic Partnerships: Stephen A. Halsey utilizes New York State and New York City community resources to provide our students with outstanding opportunities to participate in enriching educational programs. Presently, JHS 157 enjoys strategic collaborations and partnerships with the following organizations: Urban Advantage: Urban Advantage (UA) is a standards-based collaboration between JHS 157 and science-rich cultural institutions including zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. Its purpose is to improve students’ knowledge of science and engineering practices. Drawing on the educational resources of the science community and its long-term commitment to science education, the Urban Advantage program provides professional development for the school’s science teachers as well opportunities for students to engage in authentic science investigations. Students pose scientifically oriented questions, prioritize evidence, and develop logical explanations, which are essential for understanding science. Urban Advantage learning experiences align with the CCLS science standards. Students participate in four types of science investigations: controlled experiments, field studies, design projects, and secondary research (using scientific data sets obtained by others). Students have developed expertise in the different types of science investigations. The botanical gardens focuses on controlled experiments, the zoos and the aquarium focuses on field studies, the science center focuses on design projects, and the natural history museum focusing on secondary research. Midori and Friends: Midori and Friends generously provides JHS 157 with a brass residency. Through this program, Midori and Friends conducts workshops throughout the year with students who play brass instruments. Professionals visit the school to conduct clinics for these students. At the culminating concert in June, the professionals perform as guest artists. Midori and Friends often provides us with musical instruments. Donations in the past have included a new tambourine, snare drum, drum heads, brass mutes, and a new case for our baritone saxophone. The Brooklyn Academy of Music Residency: The Brooklyn Academy of Music has worked with our special needs students for six years. This program provides our students with special needs the opportunity to study the cultures of different African countries through dance and music. In this unique program, an artist provides students with 12 dance and music sessions. The program culminates with students attending a dance performance at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  New York University Shakespearian Theatre: JHS 157’s collaboration with the NYU Shakespearian Theatre supports the school’s drama students. This partnership provides students with the experience of studying theatre with NYU theatre students. This experience assists the drama students in preparing for the school’s Spring showcase. Through the years some of the school’s productions have been Guys and Dolls, Music Man, and Bugsy Malone. The Halsey 2018 Spring production was Once on This Island. MOUSE/Mouse Squad: MOUSE is a youth development program which promotes technology support by teaching students how to troubleshoot basic computer issues. The students in this program participate in training workshops and attend various field trips. Students become, “Level One” computer technicians upon completion of their training. They then assist teachers and staff with computer issues. Mouse Squad also offers various competitions throughout the school year. Software Engineering Pilot Program: Stephen A. Halsey has been chosen to be a part of the Department of Education’s New Software Engineering Pilot Program. The Software Engineering Pilot program provides students with the foundational skills they need to compete for career track jobs in a variety of professional fields. Students are taught a range of computer skills, including computer programming, web design, e-textiles, and robotics. They also take elective classes in digital fabrication, 3-D printing, and animation. In addition, the school has a newly constructed state-of-the-art technology lab, complete with Promethean tables and flight simulator to support the software engineering program and the engineering cycle. St. Jude Hospital for Children: Stephen A. Halsey Junior High School 157 has participated in the St. Jude Math-A-Thon since 1985. The Math-A-Thon is an education-based fundraising program for St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital. The proceeds from the Math-A-Thon benefit some of the world’s sickest children who are battling cancer as well as other serious diseases. Every student who participates receives a St. Jude Math-A-Thon “funbook”. The “funbook” is developed by Scholastic and encompasses mathematics curriculum that is aligned to National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) standards. The participating students complete the math problems that are in the “funbook” and collect donations for each problem that they answer correctly. For the 2017-2018 school year, JHS 157 students raised $11,350.00 .These funds will support St. Jude’s Children’s Research Hospital’s mission of finding cures for children. J.H.S. 157 has raised over $70,000 over the past 29 years. Nutrition and Wellness Committee: During the 2014-2015 school year, JHS 157 established a Wellness Committee consisting of staff, parents, and students. The committee’s mission statement is as follows: JHS 157 is committed to a healthy and active school environment where our children can continuously learn and grow with the support of our teachers, administrators, families, and the community. Our goal is for all of our children to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  have a healthy mind and body so they can enthusiastically engage in academic and social activities. We strive for our children to develop an awareness of nutritional eating habits and daily sports routines. Queens Community House/All Stars Program: JHS 157 has an established partnership with the Queens Community House since 2008. The after school program provides our students with opportunities for homework help and recreational activities. Students enjoy competing in soccer and basketball tournaments. CHAMPS Middle School Sports & Fitness: JHS 157 partners with CHAMPS to provide students with sports and fitness activities. The goal of the CHAMPS Middle School Sports & Fitness program is to improve student fitness levels and overall health by increasing opportunities for them to engage in physical activity. The program promotes health-related fitness through a mix of several after-school and before-school activities including traditional sports, non-traditional sports, and fitness activities. The students enjoy participating in dance, volleyball, cheer leading, and handball teams. The ultimate goal is for students to grow to be CHAMPS — Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated, Positive Students for life. Additional After-school Programs: Stephen A. Halsey offers students after school activities such as the Boys and Girls traveling basketball team, the soccer team, the chess club, and the cooking club. Stephen A. Halsey Challenges and Areas of Focus: In the Fall of 2018, the school community carefully reviewed the NYC school survey report. Students have indicated on the survey that they were not yet completely satisfied with the school’s learning environment. Only 52% of students agreed with the statement, most students at the school treat each other with respect. The entire school community – administrators, teachers, guidance counselors, and parents – have continued to address this area of concern for our children through the implementation of the following programs: STARFISH: The school has implemented the STARFISH program. The program highlights a particular value each month. Throughout the year the following values will be highlighted in the student grade assemblies:  Sportsmanship – fair play, respect for opponents, and polite behavior by someone who is competing in a sport or other competition  Tolerance – willingness to accept feelings, habits, or beliefs that are different from your own  Appreciation – a feelings of being grateful for something; an ability to understand the worth, quality and importance of something 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15   Respect – a feeling of admiring someone or something that is good, valuable, important, etc.  Friendship – the relationship between friends; a friendly feeling or attitude; kindness or help given to someone Integrity – the quality of being honest and fair Sensitivity – an awareness and understanding of the feelings of other people    Helpfulness – making it easier to do a job, deal with a problem; willingness to help other people Each month students who exhibit the value of the month will be celebrated at the grade assembly. Bullying Under Attack: Bullying Under Attack is an anthology of first-person accounts written by teenagers from all three players in the bullying cycle: victims, bullies, and bystanders. The program will be implemented in the ELA classroom and consists of close reading lessons that meet common core standards. These lessons include: 40 close reading assignments, 40 common core academic vocabulary assignments, and 80 bullying stories from the reading resource titled, “Bullying Under Attack”. The close reading lessons address such topics as:  Cyber bullying  Diversity  Race and Ethnicity  Religion  Not being a Bystander  Causes and Effects of Bullying   Making Changes in Your Schools  Standing Up to Bullies Showing Kindness towards others Box Out Bullying: The Box Out Bullying program presents live theater shows at school assemblies featuring interactive live theater, innovative characters, student participation and evidence-based bullying prevention techniques. The program also provides comprehensive resource kits with anti-bullying materials for students, teachers, and parents. The program will also present parent workshops throughout the school year. Box Out Bullying is evidence-based and has been demonstrated to dramatically improve school culture. Section Sheets: Each homeroom will utilize a section sheet allowing each homeroom classes’ conduct throughout the school day in each class. The homerooms with the best section sheet each month will be rewarded with a pizza party. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Stephen A. Halsey is a diverse school, serving a population that is 23% Asian, 7% Black, 25% Hispanic, 2% Multi-Racial, and 41% White. English Language Learners comprise 9% of the student population, and are supported through strategic building of academic language and background knowledge. 14% of the school’s students have IEPs, and are supported with procedural and conceptual scaffolds, as well as strategic differentiation as necessary. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to data from the 2017-2018 New York City School Quality Guide, Halsey made the most progress over the past year in the element of Strong Family-Community ties, moving from a metric score of 3.15 to a metric score of 3.60. A continued focus on communication with families, along with an increase in the number of parent workshops and types of volunteer opportunities contributed to the increase in the Quality Guide metric score. A key area of focus is support for English Language Learners. On the 2018 State ELA test, 5% of English Language Learners demonstrated proficiency. On the 2018 State Math test, 17% of English Language Learners demonstrated proficiency. In order to support English Language Learners academically, teachers will focus on language objectives when working with English Language Learners, in order to consistently increase access to content in all subjects. Teachers will also provide scaffolds and strategic supports so that English Language Learners are prepared for the same rigorous tasks and content as their peers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q157 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1636 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 160 157 22 49 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 22 20 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 48.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 24.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 40.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.07 0% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 118 113 10 94.9% 6.1% 14.9% 8.1% 23.2% 3.6% 8 18% 6.4 59.3% 40% N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO NO N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Stephen A. Halsey is dedicated to promoting academic rigor and excellence through a strong Common Core Learning Standard-based curriculum. The Capacity Framework element of Rigorous Instruction is an area of strength for the school. Strong collaboration between teachers in each of the content areas results in the creation of rigorous common core aligned curriculum and powerful pedagogical practices. Meaningful professional learning opportunities further support this focus. On the 2018 New York State ELA test, 65% of students achieved a 3 or 4. On the 2018 New York State Math test, 59% of students achieved a 3 or 4. Although JHS 157 demonstrates significant strengths in the Capacity Framework element of Rigorous Instruction, the members of the School Instructional Leadership Team were able to identify an area of need after examining New York State testing data garnered from State test results. While Halsey’s overall percentage of students performing at or above grade level exceeded New York City’s percentage in both ELA and Math, Halsey’s percentage of English Language Learners performing at or above grade level fell short of the city’s percentage of English Language Learners performing at or above grade level. In ELA, 5.3% of Halsey’s English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4, while 9.9% of New York City’s ELLs scored a 3 or 4. In Math, 17% of Halsey’s English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4, while 18% of New York City’s English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, literacy strategies used in ELL classrooms will be extended to all classrooms and subject areas throughout the school, leading to an overall 5% increase in student performance, as measured by in-house Achievement Series assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Supervisors, instructional coaches, and lead teachers will meet to norm the process of creating language objectives in English Language Learner classrooms, as well as determine the high-leverage strategies that will be visible in English Language Learner classrooms. ELL teachers October 2018 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Supervisors and lead teachers will present professional learning sessions focused on language objectives and ELL-specific strategies. 8th Grade Students All Students September 2018-November 2018 September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers, Parents, Students Science and Social Studies ELL teachers November 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers, The Culturally Responsive Education committee of educators, parents, and students will be formed to explore social and educational opportunities for the student population. The committee will meet to plan and execute instructional and social supports that will lead to increased Equity and Access for all students and families. The AP of Science and Social Studies, along with Science and Social Studies teachers of ELLs, will attend professional development sessions facilitated by the Queens South Division of ELLs. Key ideas and strategies will be implemented in Science and Social Studies classrooms. Supervisors and lead teachers will share strategies presented at professional learning sessions with all teachers in department meetings. All teachers will implement strategies in their classrooms. All Students An after-school ELL program will be offered to all ELLs throughout the building. One afternoon a week will focus on ELA/literacy, and a second afternoon will focus on mathematics. English Language Learners October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Teachers Progress and effectiveness will be assessed both through teacher observations conducted by supervisors, and non-evaluative walk-throughs and inter-visitations by school instructional coaches, lead teachers, and school supervisors. 8th Grade Students October 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops taking place on Tuesday afternoons will be offered to all parents, detailing the strategies that are being implemented in all content areas. Beginning in October, a weekly Parent ELL Institute will be offered to parents of English Language Learners. The Parent ELL institute will be attended by students and their own parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Culturally Responsive Education Committee will meet biweekly on Monday or Tuesday afternoons to plan culturally responsive practices and instructional strategies to share with the staff. Teachers will be provided time to meet in teacher teams on other Monday afternoons, in order to incorporate strategies into their lesson plans and scaffolds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the School Based Instructional Leadership team will meet to analyze ELL Achievement Series results in all content areas. By February 2019, our ELLs will exhibit an overall 2% increase on in-house created assessments, as measured by the Achievement Series data system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house assessments measured by the Achievement series data system will be used to assess progress throughout the school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the Spring of 2018, the School Leadership Team and the School Instructional Leadership Team carefully reviewed the results from NYC School Survey report. The schools’ strengths in the area of Supportive Environment are reflected in the following data: • 92% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at the school. • 79% of students responded that, in most of all of their classes at their school, most students try hard to get good grades. • 89% of students agreed or strongly agreed that Halsey provides guidance to the application process for high school. • 96% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards • 95% of teachers strongly agreed or agreed with the statement Adults at this school teach critical thinking skills to students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Although the data demonstrates students’ satisfaction with the school’s environment, there were areas of need identified in the Supportive Environment section on the survey. For example, only 52% of students agreed with the statement, most students at the school treat each other with respect. The entire school community, administrators, teachers, guidance counselors, and parents will continue to collaboratively address this concern for our children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2 percentage point increase in students (included in our student body are ELLs and students with special needs) who agree with the statement, “most students treat each other with respect” in the Informational Questions section of the 2019 NYC School Survey report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, Guidance Counselors, teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will implement a unit based on the book “7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens” that promotes timeless principles: responsibility to ourselves and to our community, vision with a goal in mind, teamwork, service to our community, and renewal. In order to create a foundation for a good and positive life, it is important that students engage in the provided activities and processes that incorporate each of these fundamental beliefs and behaviors. By going through each of the 7 Habits through a series of 6 lessons, students analyze the attributes of change agents, complete Career Interest Surveys, craft academic/career focused personal mission statements, role-play conflict management, define and understand genuine listening, and finally, create a list of best habits. Throughout this Unit, students learn to help solve problems, think critically, take charge, gain confidence, and become change agents in their own right. The entire school will take part in New York City’s Respect for All program, created in response to the New York State Dignity Act. During October assemblies, students will be introduced to Respect for All and will hear plans for the program. Following assemblies, students in all of their content area classes will engage in lessons from the Respect for All curriculum. Throughout the year, additional lessons and activities will be used throughout the building. In addition to the 7 Habits Unit and the Respect for All program, the following programs will continue to be implemented: STARFISH Box Out Bullying Section Sheets Going Out to Lunch Program Scaffolds will be provided so that all students, including ELLs and SWDs, will have equal opportunity to participate in the programs listed above. Additionally, SWD’s counseling goals, management All Students, including ELLs and SWDs September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  needs and Behavior Intervention Plans will be carefully reviewed and updated. School Leaders, including supervisors, guidance counselors, and deans, will meet monthly to analyze and act upon trends made visible through section sheets, Dean’s referrals, and student surveys. School Community Trust: The entire school community will work together on teams such as the School Leadership Team, The School Instructional Leadership Team, and Teacher Teams in order to address this concern for our students. Everyone, teachers, parents, and the students will have a voice in the shared goal of improving the school environment. School Community November 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors, teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, Guidance Counselors School Community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops on the topic of bullying will be conducted during the Parent Association meetings and on Tuesday afternoons. The Box Out Bullying program will provide parent workshops during the school year. Additionally, the program will provide parents with comprehensive resource kits containing anti-bullying materials. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for the Bullying Under Attack and Box Out Bullying programs will be required, including per session funding for teachers to engage in the work. Weekly assembly periods are built into each student’s program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, students will complete an online student survey. By February 2019, at least 53% of students should agree or strongly agree that Students at my school treat each other with respect. This survey will require that the students agree or disagree with other statements as well: Students harass or bully other students.  Students harass or bully other students based on differences.   There is an adult to whom I can go to for help with a problem.  Most adults treat all students with respect. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Most students treat adults with respect.  Most students respect students who get good grades. The results of the survey will be examined by the School Leadership Team and the School Instructional Leadership Team. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February of 2019, students will complete a mid-year school survey. This survey will contain the same questions as the NYC School Survey Report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Stephen A. Halsey emphasizes cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction in order to promote equity and access all students. The school curriculum represents people of many races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds. Through the implementation of formal programs like Respect for All, and the promotion of a safe and supportive environment, Halsey’s staff collaborates to create an culture of positivity and inclusion. This is confirmed by both students and teachers on the 2018 New York City School Survey:  95% of students say that their teachers respect their culture or background.  94% of students say that their teachers present positive images of people from a variety of races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds.  94% of teachers say that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the development needs and learning interests of all their students. In order to build upon the strong existing foundation for inclusion, Halsey is prioritizing Culturally Responsive Education and will focus on increasing the 72% percentage of teachers who say that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will attend professional development sessions and receive resources focused on cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction, resulting in a 2 percentage point increase in the number of teachers who agree with the statement “I have received support around how to incorporate students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds in my practice” on the “Collaborative Teachers” section of the 2019 NYC School Survey Report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Supervisors, instructional coaches, and lead teachers will meet to norm the process of creating language objectives in English Language Learner classrooms, as well as determine the high-leverage strategies that will be visible in English Language Learner classrooms. English Language Learners September 2018-October 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Supervisors and lead teachers will present professional learning sessions focused on language objectives and ELL-specific strategies. Teachers The Culturally Responsive Education committee will lead learning sessions intended to help teachers expand their understanding of including students’ social and linguistic backgrounds into their practices. Strategies will be implemented in all teachers’ classrooms. Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers, Parents, Students October 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Progress and effectiveness will be assessed both through teacher observations conducted by supervisors, and non-evaluative walk-throughs and inter-visitations by school instructional coaches, lead teachers, and school supervisors. Teachers October 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Culturally Responsive Education Committee will plan workshops to share with parents the ways in which their families’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds are being implemented in teachers’ classrooms, and collect from parents additional cultural information to inform future strategies and approaches. These workshops will be offered during Tuesday afternoon Family and Community Engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Culturally Responsive Education committee will meet biweekly after school. Per session funding for teachers to both attend committee meetings and plan CCLS workshops will be provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 73% of teachers will agree with the statement “I have received support around how to incorporate students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds in my practice,” as measured by an in-house online survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will complete an online survey both in February and in June to assess the implementation of professional development focused on incorporating students’ cultural and linguistic practices. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The supervisory team consisting of the principal and assistant principals analyzed teacher data results from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey report. Teachers’ responses to questions regarding feedback were reviewed. The following strengths in the Capacity Framework element of Effective School Leadership was gleaned from this data:  95%of teachers strongly agreed or agreed that the principal sets high standards for student learning.  90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. The Common Core State Standards, as well as the Next Generation Science Standards Practices and the NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence Practices, are structured using a staircase of complexity that distinguish the skills and standards from one grade from those of the other grades. In 2018, 79% of teachers agreed that their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are all well-coordinated across different grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Further increases in vertical teacher team time, as well as a sharper focus during the teacher team time, will allow teachers to continue to align school curriculum across different grade levels. Collaboration among teachers at different grade levels will increase the approaches and strategies employed in lessons. As teachers move from horizontal teacher team work to vertical team work, their practices are not only broadened, but deepened; horizontal teams develop activities and practices, share them with colleagues in vertical teams, then revisit the same activities and practices through the lens of curricular alignment. For example, to support our English Language Learners, teachers will identify the language proficiency levels for students, and develop instructional conversation protocols and tiered questions aligned to those proficiency levels. These tiered questions will remain consistent across all grade levels, so that as ELLs increase their proficiency levels, they are exposed to questions that are increasing in complexity accordingly. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 81% of teachers will agree that their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well-coordinated across different grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Beginning in September, the School Leadership team, Assistant Principals, and department coaches will examine student outcomes in order to determine high-leverage Standards and Scope and Sequence practices for each department to focus upon during vertical teams. Teachers Supervisors, instructional coaches, and lead teachers will meet to norm the process of creating language objectives in English Language Learner classrooms, as well as determine the high-leverage strategies that will be visible in English Language Learner classrooms. English Language Learners September 2018-October 2019 September 2018-October 2019 School Leadership Team, Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders Assistant Principals, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers In October, Assistant Principals and coaches will share with departments the results of the student outcomes, the normed process of creating language objectives, and the high-leverage strategies that will be visible in English Language Learner classrooms. During their first meetings of the year, vertical teacher teams will meet to determine how the high-leverage standards or practices should be addressed in each grade. The growth in complexity from one grade to the next will be determined. Teacher teams, including both vertical and horizontal teams, will meet weekly in order to align practices and conceptual understandings among grade levels. Collaboration among department teachers both on the same grade level and at different grade levels will ensure target concepts and practices are emphasized equally by all grade-level teachers, including teachers of ELLs and SWDs, and built upon from one year to the next. Throughout the year, Assistant Principals and coaches will examine student work and classroom practices at all three grade levels to assess and (if necessary) revise the specific distinctions in each standard at each grade level. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers October 2018 Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders Students November 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders Teachers December 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principal, Coaches/Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will plan workshops for parents, including examples of the staircase of complexity embedded in the standards and strategies to be included in all departments and grades. These workshops will be offered during Tuesday afternoon Family and Community Engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Culturally Responsive Education committee will meet biweekly after school. Per session funding for teachers to both attend committee meetings and plan CCLS workshops will be provided. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will agree that their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well-coordinated across different grade level, as measured by an in-house online survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, teachers will complete a school-created mid-year survey containing the same questions as the Effective School Leadership section on the NYC School Survey Report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Stephen A. Halsey demonstrates significant strengths within the element of Strong Family and Community Ties of the Capacity Framework. The school enjoys partnerships with many organizations that enrich the school experience of our students. Also, parents and teachers work as partners with a unified mission of ensuring the students’ success. The supervisory team consisting of the principal and the assistant principals analyzed the preliminary results from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey report, and determined that Outreach to Parents was an area of great strength. The following data contributed to an overall 89% positive rating in the Teacher Outreach section of the School Survey:  93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, school staff regularly communicate with parents/guardians about how parents/guardians can help students learn.  93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers work closely with families to meet students’ needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37   97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child’s school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  91% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child’s needs. Although parents and teachers alike indicate that Outreach to Parents is an area of strength, data from the previous years’ NYC School Survey reports has demonstrated a specific area of need within the element of Effective School Leadership. On the 2016-2017 NYC School Survey, 58% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Results from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey indicate an increase: 73% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. School leaders and teachers will continue current efforts to provide families with opportunities to visit classrooms during the 2018-2019 school year. These efforts will include identifying high-interest lessons and presentations likely to garner interest from families, as well as increasing parent awareness of opportunities to visit classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 2 percentage points of parents who agree that they have had opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Beginning in September, the School Leadership team, Assistant Principals, and department coaches will examine curriculum in all departments to identify opportunities for parent visits to classrooms. These opportunities may include presentations of culminating projects, lessons involving topics tied to the real world, or engaging demonstrations. Teachers September 2018-October 2019 School Leadership Team, Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders In November, identified opportunities for parent visits will be shared in department professional development and/or weekly teacher team meetings. Teachers will then determine which opportunities for parent visits they will utilize. Teams will discuss what changes, if any, need to be made to their instruction in order to accommodate parent visits. Teachers November 2018 Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders Teachers will open their classrooms to parent visits, inviting parents to select classrooms and periods. Parents will be notified of opportunities via Pupilpath messages sent by classroom teachers. Parents, Students, Teachers Throughout the year, Assistant Principals and coaches will visit classrooms during the periods parents are invited, in order to monitor and provide feedback about the parent visitation process. Students, Teachers November 2018-May 2019 December 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches/Team Leaders Assistant Principal, Coaches/Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Members of the PTA will collaborate with school personnel to promote and facilitate classroom visits. All school staff will continue to communicate with parents via Pupilpath by phone and in person as necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 74% of parents will agree that they have had opportunities to visit their child’s classroom, as measured by an online survey sent to parents through Pupilpath. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created online parent survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading, Interactive Writing, Achieve 3000 Small Group Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2018 ELA data in the bottom 1/3 Designated as “at risk” by teacher Mathematics 2018 ELA data in the bottom 1/3 Science Social Studies Designated as “at risk” by teacher Designated as “at risk” by teacher Designated as “at risk” by teacher At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As determined by the guidance counselor Fluency Small Group Small Group Small Group Small Group Application Conceptual Understanding Variety of Literacy Strategies for reading Non-Fiction text Variety of Literacy Strategies for reading Non-fiction text Student attendance counseling SIFE student counseling At risk student counseling During the school day During the school day During the school day and after school During the school day During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are seven students attending JHS 157Q who are presently in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Students in temporary housing are provided a guidance counselor who works to individualize and support their classroom instruction. The students' data is carefully tracked by the School Based Instructional Leadership team. These students are provided academic intervention periods in their programs to support them academically. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. JHS 157Q received $1,500 in funding for students living in temporary housing. The money is used to provide students in temporary housing school supplies, books and other necessities the children need. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. JHS 157 Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Stephen A. Halsey JHS 157 is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, in the Parent Association, and on the School Instructional Leadership Team where they are welcomed members of the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Stephen A. Halsey JHS 157 will support parents and families by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City and State standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing Parent Involvement Policy, parents and participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association , as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and they were asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s educational program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) ; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between the teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. JHS 157 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Stephen A. Halsey JHS 157 is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: JHS 157 will: ● provide a rigorous Common Core Learning standards-based curriculum in all content areas; ● monitor the instruction through the use of frequent walk-throughs and observations; ● consistently provide teachers the opportunity to collaborate in Teacher Team Meetings and Professional Learning Communities; ● provide teachers with valuable Professional Development opportunities; ● frequently review and monitor all school data to track trends with students and address needs in a timely fashion; ● conduct Pupil Personnel meetings on each grade to identify struggling students; ● provide students with supplemental educational services as necessary; ● work collaboratively with students and parents to create academic goals in all content areas; ● provide teachers with high quality professional development workshops which focus on the Common Core Learning Standards, instructional supports for English Language Learners, Special Education Learners, and Level 3 and 4 students; ● improve student engagement by offering a variety of extracurricular activities such as Fun Night, Spirit Day, Class Trips, Dances, Student vs. Teacher competitions, and talent shows. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results with other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; Provide parents with opportunities to schedule meetings with teachers teach Tuesday. The use of Pupil Path/Skedula to allow parents to monitor their child's progress each day. ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students as well as a welcoming ,respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and in understanding how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about my child’s education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department in order to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; keep an agenda of all school assignments; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;        work to tackle all rigorous tasks presented in each of the content areas; take responsibility for their learning by remaining engaged in all classes;   bring all school notices home to my parents;   participate in grade assemblies;  ● create rigorous academic goals alongside their teachers and parents; . read at home each day; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: An analysis of the 2017 EDAT report has indicated the following: 28 (18.2%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a Level 1 or 2 on the ELA exam. 25 (16.2%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a Level 1 or 2 on the Math exam. 101 (65.6%) of ELLs are at risk level 3 or greater 71 (46.1%) of ELLs are at risk level 5 or greater Title III funds will be used to support these groups of ELL students in both ELA/ENL and Math. The Title III after school ENL and Math program will be implemented for the 2017-2018 school year. The ENL certified teachers will design lessons which utilize direct instruction with a focus on the modalities of speaking, reading and writing. ENL teachers will use programs such as, Achieve 3000, MYON News, Imagine Learning and teacher created lessons. The Math teachers will use teacher created lessons. These lessons will support students basic math skills as well as reinforce the math concepts taught in the math classroom. Parents of participating students will receive information about the program in their preferred home languages. Classes: Students will be grouped by grade. There will be a 6th, 7th, and 8th grade ELL and Math class. There will be one ENL teacher per class in the ENL program. There will be one math teacher per class with one ENL teacher pushing into the classes. Schedule and duration: November 1, 2017- June 13, 2018 ELA/ENL: Wednesday from 2:30PM-4:00PM Math: Thursday from 2:30-4:00PM Subgroups: 28 (18.2%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a Level 1 or 2 on the ELA exam. 25 (16.2%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a Level 1 or 2 on the Math exam. 101 (65.6%) of ELLs are at risk level 3 or greater 71 (46.1% of ELLs are at risk level 5 or greater 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Long Term ELLs Language of Instruction: English with home language support materials Number of certified teachers: 4 TESOL certified teachers 3 Certified Math Teachers Materials: Notebooks, chart paper, translation dictionaries, Chrome books, Achieve 3000, Imagine Learning Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The 4 ENL teachers and the 3 Math content area teachers will participate in the Professional Learning sessions provided by the Queens South FSC ELL Team each month during the 2017-2018 school year. The teachers will attend the Content and Academic Language Institute and the E3IE (Essential Elements of Effective Instruction for English Language Learners) for New Teachers. Schedule: TBD Topics to be covered: Essential teaching strategies for English Language Learners Providers: Mr. Pierre Galvez Mr. Robert Zuzzolo, Mr. Joshua Metz, and Ms. Laura Brown Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Parents will be invited to join their children in the after school program for a series of 6 sessions for Literacy and 6 sessions for Math. In these sessions, teachers will be using ENL strategies and programs which they will share with parents. For example, parents will be provided access to the Achieve 3000 and Imagine Learning program and will be provided with effective strategies for using the programs at home with their children. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Schedule: These parent participation sessions are scheduled from 2:30-4:00PM for the following dates: Literacy Parent Participation Sessions December 13, 2017 January 17, 2018 February 28, 2018 March 21, 2018 April 25, 2018 May 16, 2018 Math Parent Participation Sessions December 7, 2017 January 11, 2018 February 8, 2018 March 29, 2018 April 19, 2018 May 10, 2018 Topics: Strategies/Programs to support childrens' language learning at home Providers: Viola Astorga, James DiGennaro, Lauren Stillwell, Nicole Palmieri, Candice Wittmer, Ilyssa Soberman, Shannen Angotta Parent Notification: Parents will be notified with emails, and fliers in students' backpacks, All invitations to parent sessions will be sent home in the parent's preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $2, 272.05 X 7 Teachers= $15,904.35 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 (6th Grade) ENL Teachers working for 30 weeks (Nov. 1, 2017- June 13, 2018) (Wednesdays for 1 1/2 hours 2:30-4:00) for a total of 45 hours $50.49 per hour. 1 (7th Grade) ENL Teacher working for 30 weeks (Nov. 1, 2017-June 13, 2018) (Wednesdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 (8th grade) ENL Teacher working for 30 weeks (November 1, 2017-June 13, 2018) (Wednesdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour. 1 Math ENL teacher working for 30 weeks (November 1, 2017- June 13, 2018) (Thursdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour. 1 Math teacher teacher working for 30 weeks (November 1, 2017- June 13, 2018) (Thursdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour. 1 Math teacher teacher working for 30 weeks (November 1, 2017- June 13, 2018) (Thursdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour. 1 Math/TESOL Licensed teacher working for 30 weeks (November 1, 2017- June 13, 2018) (Thursdays for 90 minutes 2:30PM-4:00PM) for a total of 45 hours at $50.49 per hour Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials $1,900 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Chart paper, markers, notebooks for students, Chrome books  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Imagine Learning Parent refreshments $1,607.65 $250 $19, 662 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Stephen A. Halsey Borough Queens School Number 157 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Vincent Suraci Coach Ms. G. Antoniato ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. V. Astorga/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. L. Stillwell /ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. G. Vereb/ELA Related-Service Provider Ms. O. Karlic Superintendent Ms. M. Muniz- Sarduy Assistant Principal Ms. Angela Lisa Coach Ms. C. McSparron School Counselor Ms. S. Sussman Parent Mr. M. Zevon Parent Coordinator Mr. M. Zevon Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 9 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1668 Total number of ELLs 169 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.13% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0PrograLangm TBE TBE TBE DL . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. JHS 157 uses a series of Common Core/Next Generation Standards aligned assessments (unit pre-test, unit post-tests, ELA and Math Baseline, and benchmark examinations) to assess our ENL students’ literacy skills. The data from these assessments is generated by the Achievement Series data system. Achievement Series generates a skills/standard analysis report identifying each individual student's area of strength and weakness . The Achievement Series program allows teachers to extensively analyze the data of the ENL students in each of the content areas. Teacher teams use this data to design and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  modify the Common Core Learning Standard aligned units of study. The data assists teachers in the identification of specific strategies that they will utilize in each lesson. This data is also used to differentiate and scaffold the tasks of each unit lesson. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers have a teacher team meeting period in their schedules each week. Teachers also work in vertical teams on Monday afternoons. Teachers work collaboratively to design Common Core aligned assessments, unit plans, lesson plans, tasks, and rubrics for projects. They also collaborate to analyze the data from these assessments and to conduct an analysis of student work. They then use this data to design, modify, and scaffold instruction for ENL students. The Mathematics, ELA/ELL, Social Studies, and Science Vertical Teams meet monthly to discuss research based instructional strategies and to analyze student work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? For the 2018-2019 school year, JHS 157Q will use Baseline/Benchmark assessments using the New York State ELA and Math released test questions. These exams we be administered as follows: ELA ELA Baseline: September 2018 ELA Benchmark 1: November/December 2018 ELA Benchmark 2: February/March 2019 ELA New York State Examination: April 2019 Students also take ELA CCLS Unit pre and post assessments. Students writing will be assessed with unit culminating projects in each of the standard based writing genres. Math Math Baseline: September 2018 Math Benchmark 1: December 2018/January 2019 Math Benchmark 2: March 2019/April 2019 Math New York State Examination: May 2018 Students also take Math CCLS unit pre, mid, and post assessments. Students also take math quizzes. Students also take pre-test and post-test unit exams in Social Studies and Science. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? A. English Language Learners are scheduled academic intervention periods each week. The schedule is as follows: Class 602 and Class 605: 2 AIS periods per week. Class 702 and 705: 2 AIS periods per week. Class 802 and 805: 2 AIS periods per week. Students' specific needs are identified with the analysis of the Baseline, Benchmark, Pre-test, Mid-Unit Test, and Post-Test data in both ELA and Math. Students' areas of weakness in each of the standards for ELA and Math are identified and targeted in AIS instruction. B. A Math licensed teacher (ELL Math coach) is scheduled to push into the 6, 7, and 8th grade ELL math classrooms to assist with small group instruction. C. The Math teacher team has created an academic intervention support cycle for students in the math classroom.The AIS teacher meets weekly with the classroom math teacher to determine the areas of focus of AIS instruction. D. Students will participate in the after school ELA and Math test preparation programs beginning January 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  E. An analysis of the EDAT data has assisted in the identification of students with high risk factors. These ELL students will participate in a Title III after-school program which will focus on the four modalities and target their specific modality weaknesses. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT, New York State ELA and Math testing data are used to evaluate and inform the school's ELL program. The 2018 ELL Data Analysis Tool was used to analyze the 2018 NYSESLAT data. The following trends have been identified from the 2017 EDAT data: 24 (13.8%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a level 1 or 2 on the ELA Exam. This is an increase of 2% from 26 (16.6%) in 2016. 28 (16.1%) of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored a level 1 or 2 on the Math Exam. 120 (69.0%) of ELLs with at-risk level 3 or greater 89 (51.1%) of ELLs with at risk level 5 or greater 30 (17.2%) Long Term ELLs 29 (15.7%) NYSESLAT test takers scored Commanding 56 NYSESLAT test takers advanced 1 level 8 NYSESLAT test takers advanced 2 Levels 2 NYSESLAT test takers advanced 3 Levels 74 NYSESLAT test takers remained a the same proficiency level 10 NYSESLAT test taker regressed 1 or more proficiency levels There were no NYSESLAT test takers that regressed 2 or more levels 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL data is disseminated at Professional Learning Sessions in each department and at Faculty conferences.Teacher team meetings are also used to disseminate findings and to discuss changes to ENL programs and instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for our English as a New Language students is delivered with an Integrated ENL Model. We use a block program model where students travel together as a group. There are 2 ENL classes on each grade (602, 605, 702, 705, 802, and 805) containing Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding, Commanding and Non-ELL students. . All 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  ENL students in these classes receive 180 minutes, or 4 periods, of integrated ENL/ELA instruction each week. They also receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. There are 3 Integrated Co-Teaching classes which contain English Language Learners with IEPs (Class 631, 731, 831). There are also English Language Learners with IEPs in self contained classes: 691, 692, 694,791, 792, 794, 891, 892, and 994. These students receive the mandated number of minutes based on their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The 9th grade: Class 901: contains 1 Entering, 2 Emerging, 2 Transitioning, 2 Expanding, 3 Commanding students. Class 901 ENL students receive 360 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. An ENL teacher pushes into the 9th grade classroom to provide the ENL students with small group instruction. In addition to the mandated number of minutes, ENL students in Classes, 602, 605, 691, 692, 702, 705, 791, 792, 802, 805, 891, and 892 receive 2 additional academic intervention periods in each 6 day cycle. During the ENL periods, students have the opportunity to work with the following programs: Imagine Learning Dr. Kate Kinsella's English 3D program Dr. Kate KInsella's Academic Vocabulary Toolkit Students who have scored Commanding on the 2017 and 2018 NYSESLAT receive the benefit of an ENL teacher to provide them with continued support for two years after reaching NYSESLAT proficiency.Content area instruction is delivered in English. Native language support is provided with translation dictionaries, Chrome books used for translation, translated text, and supplemental materials in the students’ home language. All ENL students are supported in the classroom by the ENL teacher who employs a small group instruction model in order to differentiate the instruction. The ENL teachers utilize a balanced literacy, gradual release instructional approach. Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks. The Literacy workshop is comprised of a warm-up, connection, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a link, a work period, and a closing. The English as a New Language students work with Common Core Learning Standard aligned units of study. JHS 157 strives to align the ENL instruction with the ELA curriculum for each grade to ensure equity of content and curriculum. Additionally, the ENL teachers utilize Chrome books to allow the students access to technology in the classroom.The ENL students will be working the Imagine Learning Program. All ENL classroom instruction implements authentic reading, writing, listening and speaking activities, in order to assist students in the acquisition of the language. Students are immersed in the three types of writing: Argumentative, Informative/Explanatory, and Narrative. A writing portfolio is compiled for each child. Teachers will use Common Core Learning Standard aligned mini and culminating writing projects in combination with writing on demand assignments to assess students' writing.All ENL students will be assessed with Common Core Standard aligned baseline, benchmark, unit pre-test, and unit post-test assessments throughout the school year. The data from these assessments will be generated by the Achievement Series system. The Achievement Series data analysis system will provide the teachers with a skills/standards analysis for each student. All of these data sources will be used to track the students' progress throughout the school year b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instruction for our English as a New Language students is delivered with an Integrated ENL Model. We use a block program model where students travel together as a group. There are 6 ENL classes containing Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding, Commanding ENL students and non-ELL students. All ENL students in these classes receive 180 minutes, or 4 periods, of integrated ENL/ELA instruction a week. They also receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  There are 3 Integrated Co-Teaching classes which contain English Language Learners with IEPs (Class 631, 731, 831). There are also English Language Learners with IEPs in self contained classes: 691, 692, 694,791, 792, 794, 891, 892, and 994. These students receive the mandated number of minutes based on their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The 9th Grade: Class 901: contains 4 Expanding and 4 Commanding students. Class 901 ENL students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. An ENL teacher pushes into the 9th grade classroom to provide the ENL students with small group instruction. In addition to the mandated number of minutes, ENL students in Grades 6, 7, and 8th grade receive additional AIS periods. Grade 6 receives 2 additional 45 minute AIS periods. Grade 7 receives 2 additional 45 minute AIS periods. Grade 8 receives 2 additional 45 minute AIS periods. All ELLs with IEPs recieve 2 additional Academic Intervention periods each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ENL students are supported in the classroom by the ENL teacher who employs a small group instruction model in order to differentiate the instruction. The ENL teachers utilize a balanced literacy, gradual release instructional approach. Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks. The Literacy workshop is comprised of a warm-up, connection, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a link, a work period, and a closing. A variety of mini-lessons are utilized. Teachers use the following types of mini-lessons: "I do, you do" "I do, we do, you do" "I do, you do, I do again, you do (split mini-lesson)" "you do, we do, I do, you do (investigative approach)"All of the English Language Learners work with Common Core Learning Standard aligned units of study. JHS 157 strives to align the ENL instruction with the ELA curriculum for each grade to ensure equity of content and curriculum. Additionally, the ENL teachers utilize Chrome books in the classroom. Students will also work with the following programs: Dr. Kate Kinsella's English 3D program Academic Vocabulary Toolkit Imagine Learning All ENL classroom instruction implements authentic reading, writing, listening and speaking activities, in order to assist students in the acquisition of the language. Students are immersed in the three types of writing: Argumentative, Explanatory, and Narrative. A writing portfolio is compiled for each child. Teachers will use CCLS aligned mini and culminating writing projects in combination with writing on demand assignments to assess students writing.All ENL students will be assessed with the CCLS aligned baseline, benchmark, unit pre-test, and unit post-test assessments multiple times throughout the school year. The data from these assessments will be generated by the Achievement Series data analysis system. The Achievement Series data analysis system will provide the teachers with a skills analysis for each student. All of these data sources will be used to track the students' progress throughout the school year. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students' second language is supported in the ESL classroom through the use of translation dictionaries and translated materials whenever possible. All ENL students are provided with translated versions of State and local examinations. Each ENL literacy classroom contains a class set of Chrome books. These Chrome books are used to provide students with translated materials. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  In addition to the extensive differentiation and scaffolding throughout CCLS aligned units of student in the ELA/ENL integrated classroom, the ENL students will be working with the following supplemental programs: SIFE: Imagine Learning Newcomer: Imagine Learning Developing: MyOn, Imagine Learning, and Castle Learning Long Term: My On , Kate Kinsella's Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, and Imagine Learning Literacy program. Former ENL students: Receive the support of an ENL licensed teacher for two additional years after exiting ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ENL students and Students with Disabilities use a multitude of research based instructional strategies to provide access to academic content and accelerate English Language Development. Teachers use strategies obtained from FSC Queens South CALI Professional Learning sessions. Teachers use strategies such as: Language Objectives Think Write Pair Share Think Pod Square Visual representations Word Banks Note Sheets Hands on Activities Instructional Conversations Question Matrix One Page Wonder Sentence Starters and Frames T.A.P.P.L.E Various graphic organizers such as the triple entry journal chart Conversation Club House Chunking Text Collaborative Posters Four Corners 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Flexible scheduling for students with disabilities is critical to the success of any school’s implementation of inclusive service delivery models. We believe it is essential to develop student and staff schedules that reflect effective supports for all students. J.H.S 157 has accommodated special education students in grades 6-9 with parallel schedules. General education and special education teachers are providing instruction in the same content area during the same periods. This significantly increases the ability for fluidity between settings. English Language Learners with disabilities have access to scheduling flexibility. Students are placed in general education and honors classrooms in the content areas based on the areas of strength demonstrated in their Individualized Educational Programs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. JHS 157 uses the following targeted intervention programs: Imagine Learning Literacy MyOn Castle Learning Kate Kinsella 3D English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Kate Kinsella Vocabulary Toolkit Newcomer ELLs will work with the Imagine Learning Literacy with home language support. Developing ELLs and Long Term ELLs work with Imagine Learning Program, Kate Kinsella 3D English, and Kate Kinsella's Vocabulary Toolkit. English Language Learners with Disabilities work with Imagine Learning and My ON. English Language Learners will have the opportunity to work on the Imagine Learning program in school and at home. In addition to the mandated number of minutes, English Language Learners in grades 6, 7, and 8 receive additional Academic Intervention periods. All English Language Learners with Individualized Education Plans also receive up to 3 additional Academic Intervention periods each week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? An analysis of the 2018 New York State ELA testing data conducted by JHS 157 has indicated the following for English Language Learners (see chart below): An analysis of the 2018 New York State Math testing data conducted by JHS 157 has indicated the following for English Language Learners (see chart below): 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners are offered and participate in all school programs. They attend weekly grade assemblies where they are informed of the different programs and the application process for each program. Parent meetings are also scheduled by the Parent Coordinator to inform the parents of the ELLs about the extra-curricular activities offered by JHS 157. English Language Learners also select a talent program each year. They participate in all after school activities, such as school productions, fund raisers, dances, etc. In addition, many students participate in the Queens Community House All Star Program after school at JHS 157. English Language Learners at JHS 157 are offered numerous after school programs. Students participate in the Language Institute with their parents. Parents and children meet each Monday night from 6:30-8:00P.M. and they participate in authentic language activities. English Language Learners are also able to participate in the Title III after school program for both ELA and Math. These programs are conducted each Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30P.M-4:00P.M. English Language Learners will also participate in the after school ELA and Mathematics test preparation courses. We encourage our English Language Learners to take advantage of the many programs offered at JHS 157. These programs are opportunities for our English Language Learners to develop language with the help of their peers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Imagine Learning, Castle Learning, MyOn, Kate Kinsella English 3D, Kate Kinsella Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Literacy programs are used to support ENL students. All ENL classrooms are equipped with a Smart board so the teacher may use visuals to support language development. The ENL language development is also supported through the Expeditionary Learning materials in the ELA classroom. All of the English Language Learners also have access to Chrome books in each ENL/ELA classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in our ENL classroom through the use of translation dictionaries. Students also have access to translated versions of examinations and text whenever possible. Additionally, students use the Chrome books to assist in translation. The Imagine Learning and Castle Learning programs provides students with home language support. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to, ENL students ages and grade levels. Our ENL students are provided equity of content and curriculum at each grade level. The ENL students are exposed to the same Common Core/Next Generation Learning Standards-based Units of Study and rigorous tasks as the General Education population in each of the content areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ENL students are provided the support of a Guidance Counselor. The Guidance Counselor contacts all of the student’s teachers and also provides the student with a “buddy”. The buddy speaks the child’s language and helps him/her to become acclimated to the school. In addition, all newly enrolled ELLs attend an orientation with their parent in the month of September. ELLs who enroll after September are provided individual orientations with the parent coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The English Language Learners in grades 6-9 are offered a Spanish Language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Throughout the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years, ENL and Content area teachers will attend the Queens South BFSC Content and Academic Language Institute (CALI) sessions. These sessions will support teachers in the development of a toolkit of instructional strategies which support English Language Learners. These teachers will share the instructional strategies obtained from these sessions with their colleagues in teacher teams, common planning, department professional learning session. The assistant principals in charge of Math, ELA/ENL, Social Studies, and Science will attend the ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI): Phases of Learning conducted by the Queens South BFSC ELL coordinators.The administration will then use the professional learning strategies to support the ENL teachers in the classroom. Finally, J.H.S 157 will provide ENL teachers one-on-one professional support and development in scaffolding the Next Generation Learning Standards for the ELLs with the Assistant Principals, Instructional Consultant, the ELL coordinator/coach, and the ELA 6th, 7th, and 8th Grade Team Leaders. These professionals will work one-on-one with teachers to assist them in the scaffolding of lessons and the use of effective instructional strategies to meet the needs of the English Language Learners 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  that they teach. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff (content area, ENL, and special education teachers) will receive at least 7.5 hours of ELL training during the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years. The ELL coordinator and ELL teachers will present the instructional strategies acquired at the the Queens South BFSC Content and Academic Language Institute (CALI) sessions. The assistant principals of Math, ELA/ENL, Science and Social Studies will attend the ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI). They will then support teachers in the application of the instructional strategies that have been shared through professional development. Additionally, ENL and select content area teachers will work with the professionals from ElevatED Learning Services. Elevated Learning Services (www.elevatedlearningservices.com), was founded by two former educators from the International High Schools and the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) in NYC with over 40 years of combined education. The is organization dedicated to providing high-quality professional development workshops that afford participants the chance to learn new concepts in authentic, experiential ways that transcend the usual passive PowerPoint presentation and lecture. The design of the workshops reflects the belief and experience that everyone learns better when given the opportunity to collaborate around the target concepts and apply them to real-world situations relevant to them. We specialize in the topics of project-based learning, collaboration, and language and content integration and offer supplemental curriculum development and teacher coaching to support teachers in implementing newly-learned techniques and strategies in the classroom. These professional development hours will be accomplished during teacher team meetings and bi-weekly department conferences. The focus of the P.D. sessions will be the integration of language development in content area instruction, the scaffolding of the Common Core Learning Standard aligned instruction for English Language Learners, and effective instructional strategies for ENL students. The P.D. agendas, sign-in sheets, and materials of each of these professional development sessions will be maintained by the ELL coordinator and the Assistant Principals of each department. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the school year, teachers will conduct meetings with the parents of ENL students. These meetings will be conducted on Tuesday afternoons. At these meetings, teachers will discuss the goals of the ENL program, students' language development, and assessment results. Interpretation is provided at these meetings with the use of staff members and the Department of Education Interpretation and Translation Unit. When conducting parent meetings we use staff members to translate the meeting for the parents. We have Russian, Uzbek, Urdu, Italian, Chinese, Tajik, Tagalog, French, and Spanish speaking staff members. Additionally, funds are put aside to provide parents with translators at meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. JHS 157 strives to create a strong partnership with parents. Parental involvement ensures student success. The school organizes frequent parent meetings and activities to develop relationships with parents. The following are just a few of the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  parent events the school conducts: Parents of the incoming 6th graders are invited to the school for an orientation. Our 8th and 9th grade students and their parents attend High School Information Night in order to learn about the High School application process. The Parent Coordinator, Mr. Zevon conducts workshops for parents on topics such as internet safety, school functions and activities, and community services. The Parent Coordinator also conducts parent trips. For example the parents of English Language Learners attended a trip to One World Observatory on a Saturday, in November 2018. Teachers and guidance counselors organize school spirit activities such as the “Halsey Fun Night” International Night celebrates students' cultures. Translation services are available at all school meetings. Teachers are provided with the DOE translation phone number to assist them in all parent meetings. Pupil Path is a website used to keep parents informed of students' grades and assignments each day. The parents can also contact the teacher via the website. The Parent Coordinator, Mr. Zevon designs weekly parent e-mails and a monthly calendar to inform parents of all school activities. During the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years, JHS 157 will invite parents to attend the English Language Parent Institute. Parents will attend this class with their child. This class will be conducted each Monday night from 6:30PM-8:00PM. This class will be taught by a two TESOL licensed teachers. The class will work to support parents with the English language and to also teach them strategies that they may use to support their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Vincent Suraci, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Stephen A. Halsey School DBN: 28Q157 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Vincent Suraci Title Principal Ms. Angela Lisa Assistant Principal Mr. Michael Zevon Parent Coordinator Ms. Viola Astorga ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Mike Zevon Parent Ms. Olivia Karlic Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Antoniato/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Genevieve Vereb/ELA Coach Ms. S. Angotta/Math Coach Ms. Stephanie Sussman School Counselor Ms. M. Muniz-Sarduy Mr. Joshua Metz Ms. Lauren Stillwell/ENL Teach Ms. Jessica Gallagher/ENL Teac Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Queens Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/10/17 10/1/18 10/1/17 10/10/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 10/1/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Stephen A. Halsey Superintendent: Ms.M. Sarduy DBN: 28Q157 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Angela Antoniato Lisa Gina conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Assistant Principal ELL Coordinator Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The RCPL, RHLA, and RPOB ATS reports are generated and Home Language Survey Forms are reviewed regularly by the LAP team. In addition , other informal assessments such as student conferring and parent contact are used to assess our school’s oral interpretation and written translation needs. Information about parents’ preferred language of communication is indicated on the emergency contact card. The ENL Continued Entitlement and Program Placement letters are sent home in the various languages. After the LAP team analyzes all of this data, oral translation services are sought within the school community. As we have a very diverse population of students, the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit is used when needed. Additionally, JHS 157 also employ Quick Response Codes (QR Codes). QR codes will be listed on the bottom of important school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  documents, assignments, and student tasks. Parents can activate the QR codes using their cell phones and tablets. Parents will then be directed to audio translations of these important school documents, assignments or tasks. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Written Percent Oral Oral Percent Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese (ANY) Cantonese Dari/Farsi/Persian French Gujarati Hebrew Hindi Japanese Mandarin Mossi (AKA MORE) Nepali English Pashto (AKA Pushto) Pilipino (AKA Tagalog) Punjabi Polish Portuguese Russian Senufo Serbian Spanish Swedish Tibetan Turkish Tadzhik (AKA Tajik) Urdu Ukrainian 7 5 5 66 0 1 1 1 2 2 4 0 1 2 0.26 0.18 0.18 2.43 0 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.07 0.07 0.15 0 0.04 0.07 6 5 8 63 1 1 1 1 4 1 4 7 1 2 2047 75.31 2026 1 2 9 5 2 288 2 0 204 1 4 1 4 5 1 0.04 0.07 0.33 0.18 0.07 10.6 0.07 0 7.51 0.04 0.15 0.04 0.15 0.18 0.04 1 2 9 6 2 293 2 1 207 0 4 1 6 6 1 0.22 0.18 0.29 2.32 0.4 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.15 0.04 0.15 0.26 0.04 0.07 74.54 0.04 0.07 0.33 0.22 0.07 10.78 0.07 0.04 7.62 0 0.15 0.04 0.22 0.22 0.04 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Uzbek 45 1.66 46 1.69 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Entitlement Sept. 17, 2018/ongoing Continued Entitlement Sept. 17, 2018 Non-Entitlement Sept.17, 2018/ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written Translation via DOE The DOE vendor "The Big Word" will be used to translate any documents for the languages the DOE does not cover. Letters will be sent home with students. Written Translation via DOE The DOE vendor "The Big Word" will be used to translate any documents for the languages the DOE does not cover. Letters will be sent home with students. Written Translation via DOE The DOE vendor "The Big Word" will be used to translate any documents for the languages the DOE does not cover. Letters will be sent home with students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Program Placement Sept.17, 2018/ongoing Written Translation via DOE The DOE vendor "The Big Word" will be used to translate any documents for the languages the DOE does not cover. Letters will be sent home with students. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Orientation August 29, 2018 Curriculum Night September 20, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference November 27 and 28th 2018 High School Nights October 2018-March 2019 Parent Teacher Conferences March 26 and 27th, 2019 Parent Teacher Conferences May 16, 2018 PTA Meetings September 2018-June 2019 Individual Parent Conferences September 2018-June 2019 interpretation service(s)? Staff Interpreters and Translation Interpretation Phone Services. Staff Interpreters and Translation Interpretation Phone Services Staff Interpreters and Translation Interpretation Phone Services Teachers and paraprofessionals will be paid per session using the translation and interpretation funds to provide translation at all after-school meetings that are not required. Staff Interpreters and Translation Interpretation Phone Services Staff Interpreters and Translation Interpretation Phone Services Teachers and paraprofessionals will be paid per session using the translation and interpretation funds to provide translation at all PTA meetings. JHS 157 works to conduct parent conferences before and after school in order to support parents. When applicable, teachers or paraprofessionals will be paid per session using the translation and interpretation funds to provide translation at these meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All home languages are listed on students' emergency cards. In the event of an emergency parents will be contacted via phone call using staff translators whenever possible or the translation phone services whenever needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to fulfill Chancellor’s Regulations A-663, JHS 157 has designated the Parent Coordinator as the point person to make arrangements for parent translation and interpretation services. The Parent Coordinator assists parents with all communication within the Department of Education. Parents are also provided a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Signs in the predominate language indicating the availability of interpretation services are prominently displayed in the school’s main entrance and in the main office. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will also be distributed and presented in the September 4, 2018 Staff meeting. Finally, the school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barrier. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. The parent coordinator as well as administrators and teachers inform parents of their rights to translation of all meetings and materials. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent survey portion of the New York City school survey will be used to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of language services. This data is analyzed each year and based on the findings, the school works to improve parent communication and services In addition, the parent coordinator, Mr. Zevon sends parent e-mails each week. Parents are encouraged to reach out to Mr. Zevon regularly to provide feedback and discuss any 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  additional support they may require from the school.The weekly email is designed to keep the lines of communication open to all parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
