2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q162 School Name: P.S. 162 JOHN GOLDEN Principal: PAMELA LEE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The John Golden Elementary School 26Q162 342600010162 PreKindergarten through Fifth Grade School Number (DBN): 201-02 53rd Avenue 718.423.8621 Phone Number: 718.423.8647 Fax: Andrea Schweiger Aschwei@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Pamela Lee Email Address: ParaskeviParliaros/ Jeanine Careccia Patricia Esposito/Linda Lovett Melissa Mora/Pamela Lee N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718) 631-6943 Phone Number: (718) 631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pamela Lee ParaskeviParliaros Patricia Esposito N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Melissa Mora Martha Lee Sandy Chiang *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Co-Chair/parent Member/parent Member/parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Effie Sotiriou Lisa Giuliano Jeanine Careccia Kristin Ferrara Lisa Andriano Aimee Serfaty Member/parent Member/parent Member/ teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The expectations of our students at P.S. 162 are taken from our mission statement, “The P.S. 162 school community seeks to provide an educational environment in which all children can meet and exceed the Learning Standards. Parents, staff and students work cooperatively to provide a positive learning environment necessary in developing contributing citizens to our society.” Our P.S. 162 John Golden letterhead logo reads, One small “Golden” step in education. One “Giant” step toward the future!” We believe we have imparted this idea into the minds and hearts of all who enter our building and realize 2018-19 CEP 9  that this vision mirrors that of the “Four Pillars” in conjunction with New York State's newly-adopted Next Generation Learning Standards. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 162, also known as the John Golden Elementary school is located in the central part of school district 26. The school serves approximately 660 students in grades pre-kindergarten through grade five. It serves an ethnically and culturally diverse student population, approximately: Hispanic (10.57%), Asian (71.88%), African/African-American (1.73%), Caucasian (13.76%), and others (2.06%). Approximately 47.71% are female and 52.28% are male. P.S. 162 has an excellent student attendance rate with an average of over 97% each week. The John Golden School has 31 classroom teachers on staff, 100% of whom are fully licensed. Other staff members consist of specialty clusters (5), ESL teachers (2.6), SETSS Teacher (.6), IEP teacher, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, speech therapists (2), occupational therapist, school nurse, secretaries (2), school aides (5), safety agent, custodial and School Foods staff. Our expectations align with the Chancellor’s initiatives and the Mission Statement of The New York City Department of Education; “The NYC Department of Education is committed to working collaboratively with parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school, is prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking citizen.” P.S. 162 takes a data-driven approach to improving student performance. Both formal and informal assessments are used to follow student weaknesses and growth on a continuous basis and we update our CEP goals on a yearly basis. Going into our third year with the Teachers College Reading and Writing approach, we have established coherent structures of instruction for increasing engagement, stamina, and quality in the English Language Arts. We are proud of our current accomplishment of receiving the “RESPECT FOR ALL” award and "No Place for Hate" award, which is due to our dedicated staff and students who are part of our GREAT CITIZEN Program and “No Place For Hate” program under our Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) initiative that evolved through our Student Council. These programs provide a supportive environment for students to learn. We have received "Reward School" status multiple years in a row. Additionally, we were given the distinguished award as a BLUE RIBBON School in 2008. With respect to fostering collaborative teachers and effective school leadership, we have a dedicated staff that rises to the occasion of “distributive leadership" which is promoted by the administration. There are multiple study groups and professional learning experiences that teacher leaders facilitate. Additionally, all grades have at least 3 common planning periods plus Monday afternoons to engage in professional learning that is facilitated by teacher colleagues. This will be our third year with PreKindergarten. This will be our second year with a Chinese Mandarin/English Dual Language in grade 1 and 2; another initiative to support one of our most in need subgroups of students while at the same time providing the gift of two languages to a variety of learners. We have at least one Integrated Co-teaching class in every Kindergarten to grade 5, with two ICT classes in grade 4 to support the increasing number of Students with Disabilities. Additionally, this will be our first year with a bridge K/1/2 12:1 class and a bridge 2/3/4 12:1 class to further increase support to Students who thrive in settings with a lower student to teacher ratio. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  There are 23.9% (students) identified as English Language Learners and 12.9% (students) are receiving Individualized Education Plans (IEP) /mandated services. We also believe strongly in considerations for our population with specific needs in programmatic decisions and teacher planning. We have an ICT class on every grade which has significant bearing on Students With Disabilities (SWDs). We strive to support all of our ENL students and SWDs to meet the rigorous expectations of New York State's standards. In order to achieve this goal, we have implemented a variety of structures. These include: push-in and pull-out Response to Intervention (RTI) and At-Risk services, small group instruction during regular class time and during Circular 6 periods, adjusting and/or scaffolding tasks, translation of tasks, extended time offered as needed or mandated to complete work, IEP accommodations, frequent clarification of tasks, and modeling appropriate responses. Our ENL services along with our Mandarin Dual Language class support our English language learners. Moreover, we continue to refine our structure for Response to Intervention (RTI) by strengthening Tier 1 teaching practices, frequently progress monitoring student who will receive Tier 2 classroom support, and thoughtfully support students with Tier 3 researched-based programs (Spire, Sound Sensible, Orton-Gillingham). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. With respect to the Framework for Great Schools, the area we have made the most progress in is strong family and community ties. Our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) is devoted to the success of all school activities and plays an active role in the success of our students. This demonstrates that P.S 162 has strong family and community ties. The PTA president and co-president collaborate with the administration to develop workshops for parents, plan activities and network with all members of the community to support and generate a successful climate within the school surroundings. The PTA also supports all P.S. 162 teachers and support service members by providing them with supplementary materials for classrooms and students. Each year the PTA funds the 5th grade Ballroom Dancing program and contributes monetarily to provide resources for our in-school art program. In order to strengthen trust, high expectations are conveyed to parents at School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings as they are an integral part in the Comprehensive Educational Plan of our school. At these meetings, the members discuss ways to support the students of PS 162 in maintaining academic rigor and success of our students. Our school website helps our school community communicate more effectively. All stakeholders are able to easily communicate and address key initiatives and concerns clearly and consistently through our new added contact forms. Our Teachers, PTA, and Parent Coordinator can be contacted directly through our website. In addition, new teacher websites are linked to our website. Another area with respect to the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress was in rigorous instruction. A review of the Spring 2017-2018 state standardized assessments indicate that 71.3% of our students are performing at or above state standards in ELA. This was a 10.5% increase in proficiency overall. This progress is significant, especially considering our increase last year of 7.4% already. To maintain and build on our success in ELA, we partnered with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to provide coherence and professional support to our English Language Arts instruction. This partnership speaks to rigorous instruction and effective leadership. Additionally, we will continue to have a labsite and lead teacher for ELA in every grade participate in our Teachers College Instructional Team, to turnkey learning about highly effective teaching practices in questioning/discussions, assessment, and planning. We attribute this success in all subjects to our strong instructional focus on autonomy, student voice, and student partnership work across all classrooms and subject areas. P.S. 162 has a strong belief in student autonomy, student accountability, and student discussions. Building on last year's work, this year, we will focus on formative assessments via work on giving and receiving high-quality and effective feedback. 2018-19 CEP 11  Additionally, we believe in a "growth mindset". These factors serve as the bases for restructuring the curriculum, instructional learning process and assessment to promote the fullest possible intellectual development of a multicultural diverse student and with the intent of fostering a supportive environment for learning. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q162 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 680 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 19 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 64.0% % Attendance Rate 52.2% % Reduced Lunch 16.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 11.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 67 96.6% 11.6% 14.3% 1.9% 71.8% 1.6% 2 0% 6.6 74.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: A review of the Spring 2017-2018 state standardized assessments indicate that 71.3% of our students are performing at or above state standards in ELA. This was a 10.5% increase in proficiency overall. This progress is significant, especially considering our increase last year of 7.4% already. We plan to continue to support students in all subgroups in reading to meet the challenges of the new Next Generation Learning Standards and to better prepare our students for success in college and career readiness. Areas of Need: Data from our TC Reading Assessment results reveal there is a need to support students reading at level 1 and 2 (especially for ENL students). Data collected from ATS generated from the Home Language Survey this year found that that well over 50% of our students are coming from non-English speaking homes. This trend will have an impact on the English Language acquisition of these students. Our focus is to concentrate on raising the reading achievement of our English language learners. We need to concentrate on moving our most-struggling students. We will refine our RTI process to build in more Tier 2 supports and progress monitoring in classrooms, so that our IEP teacher can support students at Tier 3 for intervention. Additionally, research supports our RTI team and PPT's effort to continue to target and monitor grade 1 students who are the most at-risk in learning to read, so that they can read to learn. By ensuring that students are meeting literacy benchmarks by the end of the second grade, this also supports Chancellor Farina's "Equity & Excellence" initiative. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To support rigorous instruction, by June 2019, 90% of all students with ELL services in grades K-5 will improve their advanced literacy skills as measured by making at least one number level increase on the TCRWP (Teachers college Reading and Writing project) benchmarks for progress reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs Teachers will use the Teacher’s College Workshop Model (grades K-5), Steck Vaughn vocabulary program (K-5), and Fundations (grades K-2) into their reading units and lesson plans. Strategies to Address SWD’s and ENL’s Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administrators Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administrators ● Teachers will assist students (including SWDs and ENLs) in identifying and establishing clear learning goals to improve their reading comprehension of both fiction and non-fiction text. ● Support staff (SETSS teachers and ENL teachers) will provide both push-in and pull-out services in order to support the needs of SWDs and ENLs. ● Meet monthly with PPT, RTI Team, and Inquiry Teams to ensure that students with IEP’s and/or special needs are receiving the services needed to succeed and show growth. ● Teachers will engage at-risk students in Tier 2 intervention, model close reading, analyzing informational texts, and higher order questioning and discussion techniques. Students will demonstrate higher order thinking and comprehension through their informational writing. Teachers will monitor progress made closely to inform who they will discuss with the RTI team for Tier 3 intervention. Administration and teachers will disaggregate and analyze trends in school wide data on ELLs and SWDs, in order to plan and implement differentiated professional development opportunities. Professional Learning and Trust ● Each grade elected to use each weekly circular 6 preparation period to engage in grade planning at minimum. Some grades meet during common planning times as well as after school on Tuesdays. Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administrators 2018-19 CEP 15 ● Admin, teacher teachers, ENL teachers, and special education liaisons will provide professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals in order to share strategies and best practices that can be used to improve student comprehension. ● Teachers College (TC) Staff Developers will provide 20 days of professional development, split between grades K-2 and 3-5. ● Teachers, coach, and administrators will participate at professional development days at TC. ● 4 cycles of observations will monitor coherence within each grade. ● Staff Development Committee will monitor the effectiveness of professional learning structures. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will communicate with parents during parent engagement time, during preps, and parent teacher conference time to engage parents in discussions about best practices on how they can support their child’s reading comprehension at home. Teachers will plan parent workshops designed to offer parents resources for working with their children at home to improve reading comprehension. Connected to our Goal 5, parents will be taught and encouraged to give children positive feedback on writing products. There will be monthly Sip and Chats with the Principal with refreshments sponsored by our PTA. There will be TC workshops during which parents will be able to visit classrooms on all grade levels to observe instruction and student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  10 Day(s) K-2 TC Staff Developer Day Staff Developer  10 Day(s) 3-5 TC Staff Developer Day Staff Developer  TC Principals as Curricular Leaders Membership  Provide each classroom teacher with Columbia University’s TCRWP Reading Assessments for independent reading levels. Provide individual Reading Pacing Charts for the purpose of monitoring each student’s reading progress throughout the year.  Provide each classroom teacher, K-1, with TC Pacing Calendars for reading and units of study.  Teachers providing AIS instruction will utilize components of the TC pacing calendars for K-5. Services may be provided on a push-in or pull out basis. 2018-19 CEP 16   Circular 6 Preps will be an additional time to for common planning.  Monthly, on Monday's 80 Minute Professional Development time, one vertical teacher study group will inquiry-based study of student work and performance and then build capacity amongst grade members during common planning meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 45% of all students with ELL services in grades K-5 will improve their advanced literacy skills as measured by making at least one number level increase on the TCRWP (Teachers college Reading and Writing project) benchmarks for progress reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College running records assessment for reading levels. Assessments in the 5 pillars of reading and 1 in writing. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Based on feedback received from our Fall 207-2018 Quality Review which addressed the importance of providing opportunities for students to engage in meaningful, student-led conversations requiring critical thinking skills, and assessment approaches for student understanding of skills/strategies learned within each lesson, members of our SLT, teachers, the principal and assistant principal have identified the need to focus on further developing teacher effectiveness in the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric, Component 3b, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c, Student Engagement and 3d, Assessment. Therefore, we will prioritize the need to celebrate positive student behavior and positive choices which will increase student engagement in the classroom. Additionally, according to the NYCDOE OORS (occurrence report system), in 2016-2017, we had 91 incidents reported, as compared to 123 incidents reported in 2015-2016, a significant difference of 32 incidents; a 26% decrease. Moreover, it was the highest level incidents (levels 4 &5) that saw the dramatic decrease from 34 level 4/5 incidents in 2015-2016 to 20 level 4/5 incidents in 2016-2017. In 2017-2018, it decreased even more to 14 level 4/5 incidents (13 level 4 incidents and 1 level 5 incident). Areas of Need: Last year, a survey to staff and students revealed that the there was a spike of incidents during lunch/recess and after lunch/recess. Therefore, we targeted our positive behavior intervention system (PBIS) efforts to those times of the school day. We conducted trainings for "PAWS" expectations of conduct in the lunchroom for all of our K-5 students. At SLT meetings, there were multiple discussions about increasing the ways in which we reward students. Therefore, we will continue these efforts in addition to solidifying a school-wide PBIS that spans across the entire school day in every area of the school. We also discussing targeting the concern around bullying and using student perception of the concern as our data point. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 10% or fewer students will report that they have been “bullied” as measured by our student survey reporting “yes” to “Have you been teased, harassed, or bullied in the last month?” 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrators  Teachers will use the criteria developed by the Great Citizen committee to identify the Great Citizen of the Month and the MVP from each class.  Teachers will use the language of Great Citizens with students.  We will provide a professional learning series for the entire staff done by Caryn DePinna (PBIS liaison) on Tier 2 behavioral interventions.  Mary Beth Fitzgerald (Occupational therapist supervisor) will continue her professional learning series for all staff on strategies that support agency and organization.  We will have a teacher study group monthly on Mondays during professional learning time.  The Guidance Counselor will continue our Peer Mediation program, continue Respect for All and No Place for Hate initiatives.  Michelle Lobachewski will continue to support the Response to Intervention team. Strategies to Address SWD’s and ENL’s Admin Sept 2018- June 2019  Administration and teachers will disaggregate and analyze trends in school wide data on ELLs and SWDs, in order to plan and implement differentiated professional development opportunities. Engaging Families  Parents will continue to be invited to celebrate the Great Citizens of the Month at PTA meetings.  Parents will continue to receive regular updates via school, grade/class web pages, and grade newsletters Sept 2018- June 2019 Parents Students Teachers Talent Coach Outside Staff Developers Administrators Teachers PD Committee Administrators Teachers Administrators 2018-19 CEP 19 which will highlight ways that parents can support their children. Professional Learning & Trust Teachers Teachers  We will have a PBIS Staff Kick-Off on 9/4/18 and a Student Kick-Off on 9/14/18 to get our staff and students excited about PBIS.  We will develop criteria to identify the Great Citizen of the Month from each class.  The Great Race process will be developed to celebrate team work and positive choices made by each class.  The PBIS Committee will meet monthly along with the Safety team.  Caryn DePinna, PBIS liaison will continue to support us in her participation at PBIS Committee meetings with resources and Benchmark of Quality assessments. Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a Parent PBIS Kick-Off on September 17, 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ●80 Minute PD time (Mondays) ● 35 Minute Parent Engagement time (Tuesdays) ● Principal/Assistant Principal Leadership Role – (Orchestrated P.D. Agenda; Supervising Committee Teams; Conducting Observations/Feedback meetings with teachers ● Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  By February, 2019, 45% or fewer students will report that they have been “bullied” as measured by our student survey reporting “yes” to “Have you been teased, harassed, or bullied in the last month?” Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. student survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to our New York School Survey 2016-2017 under Collaborative Teachers, we received 87% for peer collaboration. This is a good place to start to utilize teacher comfort level with their peers to build on each other's capacity and grow further collaboration. Our focus for Inquiry Work is to dig deeper into improving the writing of our students – identify the strengths, improve the weakness of describing story elements, analyzing texts, making statements and giving supporting details and be able to provide constructive feedback/next steps to enhance grade-level writing. This collaborative goal to share a common set of beliefs about how students learn best to increase proficiency in writing levels will be useful to drive instruction and show and increase in growth over time at the end of the school year and ultimately raise ELA scores. Areas of Need : At P.S. 162, students are being taught reading/writing through the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. They read grade-level (50% fiction and 50% non-fiction) texts and make statements for Literary/Informational writing that they support using details from the texts. Actions and effects are analyzed by students in the texts. They also determine the effect of language and aspects of text and describe the importance of story elements. By producing coherent writing that demonstrates grade-level English grammar and usage, students are communicating their understanding of the text. However, members of teacher team have shifted in many grades, so we will focus on improving collaboration and coherence across teacher teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 90% of teachers will report that there is equal contribution and equal voice during grade common planning times as measured by our teacher survey going up one level (on a scale of 1-4 with 4 being the highest). 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Programs ● Teachers in K-5 will collaborate on the grade to design CCLS aligned writing lessons using the TC Writing Units of Study. ● Teachers will collaborate across grades in order to align writing curriculum and writing rubrics with the support of the ELA coach and TC staff developers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administrators Strategies to Address SWD’s and ENL’s Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administrators ● Teachers will assist students (including SWDs and ENLs) in identifying and establishing clear learning goals to improve their reading comprehension of both fiction and non-fiction text. ● Support staff (SETSS teachers and ENL teachers) will provide both push-in and pull-out services in order to support the needs of SWDs and ENLs. ● Meet monthly with PPT, RTI Team, and Inquiry Teams to ensure that students with IEP’s and/or special needs are receiving the services needed to succeed and show growth. ● Teachers will model close reading, analyzing informational texts, and higher order questioning and discussion techniques. Students will demonstrate higher order thinking and comprehension through their informational writing. Professional Learning and Trust ● Each grade elected to use each weekly circular 6 preparation period to engage in grade planning at minimum. Some grades meet during common planning times as well as after school on Tuesdays. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administrators 2018-19 CEP 23 ● 4 cycles of post-observation conferences and monthly learning walks will be used to monitor teacher-identified individual professional learning goals. ● Coach, lead teachers, ENL, and special education liaisons will provide professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals in order to share strategies and best practices that can be used to improve student comprehension. ● Teachers College (TC) Staff Developers will provide 20 days of professional development, split between grades K-2 and 3-5. ● Lab site teachers, coach, and administrators will participate at professional development days at TC. ● The Assistant Principal and teacher leaders will participate in the NYC Department of Education's Teacher Leadership Program. The program will provide our school strategies for meeting norms, protocols for looking at student work, team building, and teacher leadership. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging Families ● Teachers will reach out to parents of ESL, SWD and struggling students to inform them of their child’s progress and work together to promote academic success. ● TC workshops during which parents will visit classrooms in all grades will help them learn about our year 2's work with the TC reading and writing program. ● A display in the prominent entry of the school by the security desk will have monthly student work in all grades updated every unit alongside the writing pathways rubrics that serve as examples of expectations of how students should be writing in every grade. ● Monthly Sip and Chats will afford parent the opportunity to visit to classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ELA lab site in every grade 10 Day(s) 3-5 TC Staff Developer Day Staff Developer TC Principals as Curricular Leaders Membership 2018-19 CEP 24  Monthly Principal/Assistant Principal meetings w/ Superintendent EngageNY resources Special Education and ENL Liaisons Tuesdays Teacher-led Professional Development for teachers on Danielson Framework for Teaching DOE professional development 80 Minute Professional Development time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 45% of teachers will report that there is equal contribution and equal voice during grade common planning times as measured by our teacher survey going up one level (on a scale of 1-4 with 4 being the highest). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. teacher survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Our school received a Well-Developed in our Quality Review 2014-2015 for the indicator 4.2. This indicator states: “ Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach 9 that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning .” In order to maintain proficiency in this Quality Review indicator, we are encouraging more teachers to take on leadership roles within the school. During the 2016-2017 school year approximately 40% of our support staff and teachers extended their expertise in leadership roles within the school building. Our teachers have benefited by these practices and have requested that this distributive leadership continues through Professional Development presentations and especially the successful inter-visitations of ICT teachers/classes. We are taking this indicator very serious and would very much like to increase teacher roles throughout the school this year to raise the level of demonstrating student engagement, questioning and discussion, and this year’s goal to increase assessment performance. Areas of Need : ● However, according to our NYC School Survey 2016-2017, collaborative teachers was rated 83% while instructional leadership was rated 68%. An effective leader needs to be aware and feel the pulse of the staff and community and most of all the students. Providing opportunities for teachers and staff to grow into lifelong educators and learners brings about stronger building capacity. Therefore it is beneficial to cultivate and build upon cooperative learning activities teacher-led professional learning, Math and ELA lead teacher workshops, ESL and Special Ed Liaison workshop activities, Mentoring of new teachers, Leadership intern programs, so that teachers will increase their professional growth and distributive leadership with regard to colleagues, parents and students in our community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will meet their professional goals as measured by our teacher survey. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Programs ● Administration will analyze results of teacher observations in order to identify teachers demonstrating strengths and therefore be able to lead professional development and professional learning opportunities. ● Teachers will engage in inter-visitations in which their colleagues will view best practices and offer each other feedback. ● TC Instructional Team members will meet once a month in order to share best practices and present information regarding curriculum planning. ● Teachers will meet in monthly interest-based study groups to study and share best practices. Strategies to Address SWD’s and ENL’s ● ICT teachers will meet monthly in order to share best practices and conduct classroom inter-visitations. ● ESL teachers will push into classrooms and provide professional development offering support and feedback for classroom teachers. ● PPT and RTI meetings will be conducted monthly and used to monitor and support student growth. Professional Learning and Trust ● The TC staff development days include labsite intervisitations. ● Learning walks around specific Danielson components will facilitate classroom visits. ● Each cluster teacher (science, technology, art, music, and physical education) has a Monday professional learning committee within the district or with other city teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers 2018-19 CEP 27 ● Administration will conduct surveys to determine the areas that teachers feel most comfortable presenting professional development. ● Teachers will be surveyed on professional development feedback forms and administration and teacher leaders will analyze that data to inform next steps of professional development. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging Families ● Teachers and the Parent Coordinator will conduct workshops and class visits in order to inform parents of curriculum shifts and offer ways to support their children at home. ● Parents, teachers, and administration will collaborate during SLT and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ELA lab site in every grade 10 Day(s) 3-5 TC Staff Developer Day Staff Developer TC Principals as Curricular Leaders Membership Monthly Principal/Assistant Principal meetings w/Superintendent EngageNY resources Special Education and ENL Liaisons Tuesdays Teacher-led Professional Development for teachers on Danielson Framework for Teaching DOE professional development 80 Minute Professional Development time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers would have met their January benchmark for their professional goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Question: On a scale of 1-3 (1-did not meet, 2-halfway there, 3-met), how close are you towards meeting your professional goal? Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) 95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school. (Q1e) 96% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests or quizzes sometimes or often. (Q4c) Areas of Need: 89% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. (Q1b) 83% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 90% increase in parent feedback on student writing as measured by the number of writing pieces with positive parent comments from October 2018's unit of study to May 2019's unit of study. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs Sept 2018- Teachers  Computer teacher will familiarize all students with the Students June 2019 Administrators school website making them more apt to use it at home with their parents. Parents  Teachers will send home monthly newsletters to update parents on class curriculum and school events. Strategies to Address SWD’s and ENL’s Sept 2018- Teachers Parent engagement time and parent teacher conferences will be used to share strategies to enhance and improve student learning through written positive feedback. Parents June 2019 Administrators Professional Learning and Trust Sept 2018- Teachers  Surveys will be taken in order to tap into the concerns and issues concerning parents, students and teachers.  Teachers will be given the opportunity to address concerns and issues by presenting at workshops and professional development as well as acting as turnkeys from outside professional development. Parents June 2019 Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Engagement  Teachers will be proactive about contacting parents during parent engagement time.  On-site translation services will be provided for parents in order to improve communication between teachers and families.  Monthly "Sip and Chats" with the Principal will engage parents in a dialogue about the writing process and giving feedback to children. Classroom visits will show parents how to support their children and providing opportunities to see learning in the classrooms.  Parents will also be informed and updated during PTA meetings and workshops. 2018-19 CEP 31   Kuei Luck CBO After School Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Messenger Communication System   Tuesday Parent Engagement Time  Curriculum Night/Parent-Teachers Conferences  Parent Coordinator   Members of the School Leadership Team  Members of the PTA Executive Board School Staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 45% increase in parent feedback on student writing as measured by the number of writing pieces with positive parent comments from October 2018's unit of study to February 2019's unit of study.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. increased number of writing products with positive parent feedback as compared to the benchmark number in September after the first writing unit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TC Reading assessments 4X yearly) will be utilized to determine if student is not making progress on reading levels for the grade. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategies/Programs include: Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group During the day One-to-one Tutoring -Close reading of short shared text -Repeated readings During the Circular 6 –SBO (extra prep 1X weekly. After-school Title III and AIS Program Teachers will analyze data and plan to provide Tier I and Tier II interventions for students who are not progressing. -Independent practice -Guided practice Formative and summative assessments and teacher conference notes and data are considered. Mathematics Students in grade K-5 will be diagnosed before each Envisions -Modeled instruction -Constructed response writing -Fundations of Reading by Steck-Vaughn -Columbia University Teachers’ College Reading & Writing Project -Constructing and De-constructing texts Strategies/Programs include: 2018-19 CEP 33 Small Group During the day One-to-one Tutoring  Science Social Studies One-to-one Tutoring During the Circular 6 –SBO (extra prep 1X weekly 2018-19 CEP 34 Math Program Topic of Study -Envisions math program Quarterly Benchmark Assessments -Math Exemplars During the Circular 6 –SBO (extra prep 1X weekly - Modeled instruction -Math drills/memorization -Manipulatives -Mathematical Discourse Strategies/Programs include: Small Group During the day One-to-one Tutoring -Step-by-step instructions During the Circular 6 –SBO (extra prep 1X weekly. Teachers will analyze data and plan to provide Tier I and Tier II interventions for students who are not progressing. Formative and summative math discussions and assessments and teacher conference notes and data are considered. Formative and summative assessments and teacher conference notes and data are considered during in-class science curriculum for K-5. Science lab teacher and classroom teacher collaborate on providing needed Tier 1 service if necessary. Formative and summative SS assessments are utilized to ascertain need for AIS services in social studies in connection with the -Inquiry -Hands-on approach -Observing and recording experiments -Graphic organizers/Thinking Maps -Integrating Literacy and Math -Scientific Discourse Strategies/Programs include: -Integrating social studies content with ELA non-fiction texts.  Social Studies Grade K-5 Scope and Sequence curriculum. -Guided practice -Thinking Maps/Graphic Organizers At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pupil Personnel monthly meetings determine if students need to receive at-risk services by school psychologist, guidance counselor or social worker. -Social Discourse At-risk services provided by the SETSS, IEP, ESL, Speech, Guidance Counselor, Occupational Therapy, and School Psychologist and Social Worker RTI (Response to Intervention) Small Group During the day One-to-one Tutoring During the Circular 6 –SBO (extra prep 1X weekly Aspire program for at-risk readers Monthly meetings determine if students need to receive at-risk services by school psychologist, guidance counselor or social worker. School Psychologist -One to one -Small groups Guidance counselor : -One to three (socialization)) -Small Group of 8 students -One to one Social Worker : -One to one -group 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are a non-Title I school. We are a non-Title I school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36 We will purchase a school bag complete with supplies to support the students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $800 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff members are highly qualified as per BEDS. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff members are highly qualified as per BEDS. Professional Learning (PL Plan includes a cycle of PL about the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) in ELA, math, and science. Teachers will also attend the borough Field Support Center's training and turnkey during our cycle of PL on the NGLS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 39  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 162Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 162Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent-Teacher Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, School Survey; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent-Teacher Association ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 162Q School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 162Q iin compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III After School Program will supplement our mandated program for English Language Learners (ELLs). ELLs in grades 3 , 4, and 5 will be offered the opportunity to participate in this program. The program will be offered on Wednesdays and Thursdays from November 7th, 2018 through Feb 14, 2019. There will be 25 sessions in total, starting at 2:20 PM and ending at 4:20 PM. The language of instruction for the long term ELLs will be English and the language of instruction for the Entering and Emerging group will be English and Chinese. The materials being used are: Readworks.org Reading A to Z Each of the groups will have a minimum of 12 students. Small group instruction will be provided by two certified ENL teachers twice a week after school. There will be one supervisor on site, either the principal or assistant principal . Students will be grouped according to their NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT proficiency levels. One group will have Entering and Emerging ELLs while the other will be comprised of Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. This after school program is designed to improve performance in English Language Arts. Strategies will be implemented to foster community, confidence, independence and engagement. Students will participate in standards-based group activities. The ELLs will be immersed in a wide range of activities to promote reading comprehension, oral language and written expression. The Language Experience Approach will be utilized to extend listening and speaking into reading and writing and to validate the student's own language in a natural setting. Thematic picture word walls, Thinking Maps, paragraph frames, pictures, sentence frames, TPR, modeling, role playing and the use of smart board technology are incorporated to encourage students to participate in class activities. Critical thinking skills are emphasized as well as academic vocabulary development. The materials used are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. Parents will be notified in both English and their preferred languages. Records of each student's attendance will be kept by the ENL teachers. Both copies of parent notifications and attendance records will be kept in a binder for compliance purposes. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The ENL teachers, who are providing instructional services for the Title III after school program will meet for joint curriculum development in order to enhance the instruction for our ELL population for a total of 22 hours among the teachers, (Ms. Diane Popeil and MS. Lindsay Lee). There will be ongoing professional development for ENL teachers, administrators and classroom teachers throughout the school year. The ENL teachers will also attend all professional learning opportunities given on Mondays after dismissal by administration or a staff member. This year both teachers will be attending a professional development series given by Queens North. We will be attending along with a classroom teacher the Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills to ELLs: Foundational Series (K-5 Cohort 1) on Wednesdays, October 10, November 07 and December 5th. We will also attend The Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: Deep Dive Series (K-5)- Implementing Structures Academic Discussions in ENL Classrooms Cohort 2 on Thursday, January 31, 2019 and Friday March 22, 2019. These will be turn keyed. We will also attend the ENL Liaison meetings throughout the year. In order to meet the needs of our large ELL population who spend most of the day in the classroom we will develop resources for the classroom teachers. Each classroom will receive a binder which will comprise of thematic picture word walls, sentence frames, paragraph frames, strategies learned at the ENL teachers' professional learning sessions resources from Teachers Pay Teachers and other sources. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale Parent engagement activites will be targeted toward parents of ELLs to promote parent partnership and ownership. Schedule and duration Both Dual language Sip and Chats and the general parent Sip and Chats with the principal are held monthly. Each of the other workshops will be held after school. The topics for our ELL parent workshops will include: · · · · · Names of providers To include parents as a partner in their child's education the following workshops will be provided. Parents will be better equipped to help their children at home. Sip and Chats - Pamela Lee, Principal Sharing online ELL resources, Getting ready for the NYSESLAT, and Resources and suggestions to continue language learning over the summer - Ms. Lindsay Lee The ENL teachers will send out a survey for teachers to provide topics they would like to cover for the ELL parents. Translators will be provided. Monthly Dual Language Sip and Chats with the Principal Monthly general parent Sip and Chats with the Principal Sharing online ELL resources Getting&nbsp;ready for the NYSESLAT Resources and suggestions to continue language learning over the summer&nbsp; 2018-19 CEP 49 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities How parents will be notified of these activities Letters will be sent out in the parent's preferred language based on the RAPL report. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Total hours worked by two teachers will be 25 sessions x 2 hours x 2 teachers = 100 hours Teachers Per-session total for the program will be: 100 x $60.65 = $6,065.00 One Supervisor per session total for the program will be: 25 sessions x 2 hours = 50 hours Supervisor Per- session total for the program will be: 50 x $63.45 = $3,172.50 26 Joint curriculum development hours to compile an ELL resource binder for classroom teachers. 26 hours x $60.65 = $1,569.40 Parental involvement: $1,569.40 N/A $3,138.80 Kids A to Z and Reading A to Z online subscriptions Teachers Pay Teachers Binders Boxes of copy paper Dividers for binders General supplies Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Wednesdays 2:20-4:20 (2 hrs) of instruction. Thursdays: 2:20-4:20 (2 hrs) of instruction. Program begins on 11/07/2018 and ends 2/14/2019 Teachers will meet to create an ELL binder of updated resources and strategies for the classroom teachers. Teachers, translators and interpreters. N/A Creation of resource binders and general supplies for the Title III afterschool program. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $ N/A N/A $15,694.00 N/A N/A N/A $15,694.00 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name John Golden School Borough Queens School Number 162 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pamela Lee Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Diane Popeil and Lindsay Lee Teacher/Subject Area Allison Solano/IEP teacher Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Danielle Morgan/SETSS Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Andrea Schweiger Coach N/A School Counselor Aimee Serfaty Parent Linda Lovett Parent Coordinator Winnie Yeh Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Jennifer Newman Speech Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 3 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 640 Total number of ELLs 186 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese/Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. Mandarin DL School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 2018-2019 1 1 0 DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool that is used to assess our ELLs early literacy skills is the TC reading and writing assessment and the high frequency word list. This provides valuable insight into our students' needs. It allows for evaluation, teaching and intervention, monitoring and supporting their academic needs. Each student's instructional level for guided reading is determined and effective instruction is designed to support student achievement. The reading assessment takes place three times a year. The informational writing assessment is given four times a year. These assessments provide valuable insights for data based instruction. The informational writing assessment indicates that our ELLs need further instruction on sentence structure, vocabulary and conventions. The reading assessments indicate an area of needs is reading comprehension due to insufficient English vocabulary. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Based on the analysis of the data the following programs have been implemented: The Steck Vaughn Elements of Reading Vocabulary program has been implemented to enhance the student's vocabulary. The Fundations Program is used to strengthen phonemic awareness. Thinking Maps are integrated into every lesson when possible in order to support reading comprehension, the writing process and oral language. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs by analyzing the progress measured on the NYSESLAT, TCRWP, and the yearly EDAT. One area of needs identified by these assessments is that our upper grade ELLs with IEP's perform lower on the listening sub-test than their peers. Our newcomer ELLs score lower on expressive skills versus receptive. Most of our students continue to need intervention in writing skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? A school wide protocol is in place consisting of a monthly RTI meeting which includes all support staff, classroom teachers and administrators. At this meeting individual intervention plans are formulated based on the individual student's needs. At risk services will be provided by either the IEP teacher, speech teacher, or the guidance counselor. Students who do not make adequate progress after six to eight weeks of intervention are brought to the monthly PPT to discuss possible evaluation to better address their needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1 Interventions: The classroom teachers constantly evaluate each student's progress to see if intervention services are warranted. The teacher must take into consideration the many factors that influence the language learning process and corresponding academic development. These include the students' prior schooling experiences, familiarity with/exposure to English, and the degree of proficiency in English and the native language. If an ELL student needs intervention, the teacher will monitor any (and all) progress on the TIER 1 Tracking form. Using the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM) or any other researched based interventions, the teacher can select an appropriate remediation based upon the need(s) of each student. The teacher will be provided the opportunity on a monthly basis to consult with their grade colleagues and the RTI team which comprises the administrators, ENL teachers, SETSS teachers, IEP teacher, and the Speech teachers. Tier 2 Interventions: For any ELL students not responding to Tier 1 strategies, Tier 2 interventions will be provided. Tier 2 builds upon Tier 1: students who have received Tier 1 interventions will continue to receive that instruction. In order for a student to receive Tier 2 interventions, teachers must hand in a copy of a Referral for Intervention Services as well as the completed copy of the Tier 1 Tracking Form with copies of student work attached. A designated team member /interventionist (Speech teacher or SETSS teacher) will be assigned and conduct the intervention service for six to eight weeks. Once the six to eight weeks are completed, the RTI team will reconvene and evaluate the student's needs and decide whether the student's needs warrant further interventions. The RTI team might also decide to keep the student in Tier 2, if the student is showing progress at this Tier. Tier 3 Interventions: Once the six to eight weeks of Tier 2 intervention is completed the RTI team will meet to discuss those students who might need further intervention. If the team decides that further intervention is required then the student will receive a comprehensive special education bilingual evaluation by the school psychologist (with parent permission). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams are used to evaluate and inform our ENL programs. 2018-19 CEP 54  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on the outcomes of these assessments students are grouped whenever possible by grade and proficiency level. Our newcomers in grades 2 & 3 are grouped together and our newcomers in grades 4 & 5 are also grouped separately in order to target their specific needs based on these findings. Our more advanced ELLs need more targeted instruction in reading and writing skills and less in speaking since many of them have been in the program for several years. Our newcomers need intensive instruction in oral language, vocabulary and basic sentence structure. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELLs at P.S. 162 receive their mandated units of services through a Freestanding ENL program model. The Freestanding English as a new language programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. The students are grouped according to proficiency level as determined by the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and current grade level. Beginner/Entering students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA. Low intermediate/Emerging level students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area for two years. The maximum allowable grade span for grouping instruction in grades K-12 English as a new Language is two contiguous grades. Special consideration is given to our newly arrived upper grade entering and emerging ELLs, they are grouped together and given native support in a pull out model due to the fact that most of the students speak Chinese and we have an ENL teacher with a Chinese bilingual extension. All levels of ELLs will be serviced based on the prescribed mandated units of service per the newly revised CR Part 154-2 requirements for English as a New Language . All students are served by dually certified teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Students will receive half of their instruction in English, and half of their instruction in Chinese/Mandarin. Language will be taught through content areas as well as through literacy. Our school will use the alternating-day model in which language used for content areas alternate from day to day. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instructional time is based on the ELL students' proficiency level as outlined in CR Part 154 - 2 Regulations. Our entering and emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL instruction per week and 180 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA. Our transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL instruction per week and 90 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA per week. Our Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week. Our commanding ELLs will receive 90 minutes of intergraded ENL/ELA or other content area per week for two years. 2018-19 CEP 55  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Freestanding ENL program the instruction is delivered in English except for the newcomer ELL where Chinese language support is available. Upper grade students are using bilingual dictionaries and bilingual Math, Social Studies and Science glossaries. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards are the use of thematic content area and project based approach, which integrates academic language development and literacy in content areas. A wide range of visual and technology resources including the Smart Board and document reader are utilized to enhance English language proficiency in all content areas. Picture/word walls are used to reinforce the content related vocabulary. Books are selected that promote the understanding of complex text. The use of NYSED blilingual content area glossaries provides native language support. These practices assure that our ELLs meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Sheltered English instruction is an instructional approach that engages ELLs above the beginner level in developing grade-level content-area knowledge, academic skills, and increased English proficiency. Teachers use clear and comprehensible English and a wide range of scaffolding strategies to communicate meaningful input in the content area to students. Learning activities that connect new content to students' prior knowledge, that require collaboration among students, and that spiral through curriculum material, offer ELLs the grade-level content instruction of their English-speaking peers, while adapting lesson delivery to suit their English proficiency level. Support in the content area is given through the use of sentence frames, paragraph frames, visuals, smart board technology, Thinking Maps/graphic organizers and collaboration with the classroom teacher. In the Dual Language program, students receive half of their instruction in English, and half of their instruction in Chinese/Mandarin. Language is taught through content areas as well as through literacy. Our school uses the alternating-day model in which language used for content areas alternate from day to day. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs in the first and second grade Dual Language classes will be evaluated in their home language by teacher-made assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE -At this time there are no Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) in our school community. Our working plan for future ELLs in this category is to bridge the academic gap through rigorous instruction. The use of leveled libraries is incorporated to facilitate the grade-appropriate reading readiness skills. In addition to the mandated ENL services, SIFE students are entitled to participate in any after school programs appropriate for their grade level. These students will also receive at risk services during the school day. Newcomer ELLs -In order to better assist our ELL newcomers, we use a wide range of visual and technology resources including Smart Boards which are in every classroom to develop English language proficiency in all content areas. Various instructional strategies will be used to meet their individual needs. Such strategies include Thinking Maps, Sentence Frames, Paragraph Frames, and hands on activities to engage students in all four modalities. All classrooms have a print rich environment that includes labeling of classroom items. Books are selected that are highly predictable, have repetitive patterns and strong picture support. Language function, language structures and vocabulary lessons are integrated in all content area lessons. Students are paired in the classroom with a peer who speaks their native language. Classroom teachers are given teaching strategies specific to ELL students. Electronic bilingual dictionaries have been purchased to facilitate language acquisition along with the use of the NYSED bilingual content area glossaries. For ELLs that have been here for more than one year and are required to take the ELA test a rigorous curriculum will be implemented to enhance their academic performance. 2018-19 CEP 56  Bilingual study notes in Chinese/English and Korean/English for science, social studies and math will be used for additional native language support. These students will be invited to attend the Title III after school program when available. Test accommodations, including extended time and separate location are used for state tests. Developing ELLs - Analysis for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years indicates additional instruction in writing mechanics and reading comprehension skills is needed. These goals will be accomplished through the following interventions: The ELLs will be immersed in a wide range of activities to promote reading comprehension and written expression. Language function, language structures and vocabulary lessons will be planned to align with each unit of content area instruction. Instruction will be differentiated to meet each ELLs learning and language needs. Various instructional strategies will be used to meet their individual needs. Such strategies include Thinking Maps, Sentence Frames, Paragraph Frames, and hands on activities to engage students in all four modalities. They will be invited to attend after school AIS/Title III programs. In consultation with the classroom teachers and support personnel, it will be determined whether or not further evaluation will be needed in order to determine if the student’s inability to make adequate academic progress is due to a reason other than second language acquisition and may need a possible referral for alternative placement in Special Education. Long-term ELLs- Various instructional strategies will be used to meet their individual needs. Such strategies include Thinking Maps, Sentence Frames, Paragraph Frames, and hands on activities to engage students in all four modalities. Long term ELLs would be invited to attend after school AIS, extended day and the Title III programs. Any student falling into this category will be brought to the attention of the RTI Team in order to determine what additional support can be given. The team will also determine whether or not to recommend if further evaluation will be needed to determine if the student's inability to make adequate academic progress is due to a reason other than second language acquisition. This recommendation will then be brought to the school's Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) for final approval. Former ELLs - Former ELLs will receive services two times per week for 45 minutes each session for two years by a fully certified ENL teacher. Strategies taught help these former ELL students master some nuances of the English language that, although proficient, have proved to be a challenge for these students. They will also receive testing accommodations, including extended time and separate location on state tests. They will be invited to any AIS and Title III afterschool programs available. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The content area instruction materials that are used in the classroom are: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt New York City Edition for Social Studies, Harcourt School Publishers - New York City Edition for Science, Envisions Math by Pearson and the Steck Vaughn Elements of Reading Vocabulary program. The reading programs are TCWRP and Fundations. The following strategies are used to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development for our ELL-SWD's: Total Physical Response (TPR) strategy, higher thinking questions, visuals, Smart Boards, picture word walls, Turn and Talk, partner work, sentence and paragraph frames and Thinking Maps, to build on prior knowledge and to scaffold information. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELLs who are already identified having special needs will be serviced as per their I.E.P. In collaboration with the Special Education teacher and classroom teacher grade level materials and specific instructional strategies will be individualized to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. Flexible scheduling is collaborated with all service providers and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs in order to meet their diverse needs. ELL-SWDs are grouped by their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL and grade level for ENL instruction. This group receives content area instruction during their ENL periods. Additionally, these students in grades 3, 4 and 5are invited to the Title III after school program for additional support. The pupil personal team (PPT) meets monthly to evaluate the progress of each student, as well as monthly RTI meetings. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The RTI team consists of the IEP teacher, SETSS provider, ENL teachers, Speech and Language teachers, classroom teachers as well as our assistant principal. The purpose of this monthly meeting is to discuss the needs of struggling students and students 2018-19 CEP 57  with special needs. ELL students when necessary are supported with intervention services to help with difficulties beyond the acquisition of the second language. In order to make accurate decisions about ELLs’ sources of difficulties, information from a number of levels must be gathered and examined, specifically: information about the learner, his or her classroom experiences, and his or her home and community context. Learner characteristics include language, experiential background, values/norms, higher-order thinking skills, individual learning style, proficiency in both languages, how the students became bilingual (sequentially or simultaneously), content area strengths, and weaknesses in each language. Classroom experiences including the ways in which instruction has been implemented with the student. Current classroom characteristics can be assessed though curriculum based measures, classroom observations, and performance-based assessments. Home-community characteristics including home language, adjustment to new environment, and family educational history need to be considered when gather data. Teams can gather student background information through family interviews, review of records. ELL students may receive at risk services in Math, ELA, Social Studies and Science from the IEP teacher in English for 4 to 6 weeks. If a student is suspected to have language deficiency problems in their first language they are given intervention by the two English speaking Speech service providers. After this Tier2 intervention is provided then the team will decide whether a Tier 3 intervention is needed. These students are also invited to any AIS or Title III after school programs offered. Once the ELL learning profile has been established using multiple indicators and sources of information, the collected data is used to hone in on specific issues for intervention. For students having difficulties in decoding in grades K-2 Fundations is used as a systematic program in critical foundational skills, emphasizing: Phonemic awareness, phonics/ word study and high frequency word study. Intervention in social/emotional issues are provided by a Chinese speaking school psychologist and a Spanish speaking social worker. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Starting in September 2017 we will be implementing a Dual Language program in the first grade in Chinese/Mandarin and expand to grade 2 in September 2018. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Whenever funds are available, our school has a Title III After school Program two (2) days a week. All ELLs are entitled to be invited to any AIS Afterschool programs. All fifth grade students including ELLs participate in a Ballroom Dancing program. All students including ELLs participate in gym, music, art, smart board and computer classes as part of their weekly schedules. All students including ELLs participate in assemblies. All students including ELLs participate in the Great Citizens program. Program invitations are sent home in their home language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms at PS 162 ae equipped with Smart Boards, document readers, Brain Pop, and Brain Pop ESL. This interactive technology keeps up with the pace of today's language learner and ensures multiple entry points within the learning process. ELL students are given the opportunity to utilize the computer lab and classroom computers, where various kinds of software and online internet access are available to improve literacy, writing and research skills. In order to better assist our ELL newcomers (less than three (3) years), we use a wide range of picture libraries, Thinking Maps, online leveled audio books on Kids A - Z, sentence frames, and technology resources to develop English Language Proficiency in all content areas. All classrooms have a print rich environment that includes labeling of classroom items. The Envision Math curriculum has a Spanish translated addition for our Spanish speaking ELLs. Books are selected that are highly predictable, have repetitive patterns and strong picture support. Language function, language structures and vocabulary lessons are integrated in all content area lessons. For ELLs that have been here for more than one (1) year and are required to take the ELA test, a rigorous curriculum will be implemented to enhance their academic performance . Bilingual study notes in Chinese/English and Korean/English for science, math and social studies will be used for additional native language support. These students will be invited to attend the Title III after school program when available. 2018-19 CEP 58  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support in the ENL Program is provided through the use of bilingual content area glossaries in Math, Science and Social Studies, bilingual picture dictionaries and access to online bilingual resources. In addition, we have a Chinese speaking ENL teacher. Other school staff members who speak Korean, Chinese, Spanish, Italian, Hebrew, Bengali, Hindi, Urdu, Russian , Ukranian, French and Greek lend support whenever needed. Parent correspondence is sent home in their native language. Native Language support in the Dual Language Program will be provided through a licensed Chinese/Mandarin Bilingual teacher. Leveled libraries will be purchased in both English and Chinese. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Whenever possible, ELLs are grouped by grade level. The maximum allowable grade span for grouping instruction is two contiguous grades. The ENL teachers plan carefully with the general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. Grade level materials and specific instructional strategies will be individualized to provide access to academic content and accelerate English Language development. ELLs who are also students with disabilities (SWD) receive accommodations that apply both to ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. ELLs with disabilities are not exempted from the NYSESLAT, and may use the test modifications and accommodations as detailed on the IEP when taking the NYSESLAT (and as permitted in the School Administrator's Manuel for the test.) ELL status cannot be the determinant factor for special education eligibility. Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches are applied to ELL students who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a reasonable time period. ELLs with disabilities must receive the required level of ELL services. The ENL teacher confers with the Special Education service provider to ensure that the resources being used are appropriate for their cognitive needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For our incoming Kindergarten students, there is an orientation meeting in the proceeding June. At this meeting interpreters are provided for the parents of the incoming ELLs. A handbook is distributed which includes kindergarten expectations/curriculum. To meet the majority of our incoming ELL population needs the handbook has been translated into Chinese. At the orientation meeting the parent coordinator compiles a list of parent email address in order to disseminate information to the parents. The incoming Kindergarten students are invited in June for a half day to visit a Kindergarten classroom. At registration the ELL teachers conduct interviews to determine NYSITELL eligibility and any existing special needs and services. At this time parents can be directed to any support staff (school counselor, parent coordinator, school psychologist, speech therapist, special education provider , OT, PT, social worker or school nurse) if they have additional concerns. Whenever a new ELL enrolls throughout the school year the ENL teachers conduct an oral interview with the parent and student and have the parent view the program choice videos in their home language. Their names are added to the parent coordinator's email list. Any special needs are referred to the appropriate support staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 59  In the self-contained Dual Language program students will receive half of their instruction in English, and half of their instruction in Chinese/Mandarin. Language will be taught through content areas as well as through literacy. Our school will use the alternating-day model in which language used for content areas alternate from day to day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers and non-pedagogic staff at PS 162 participate in the Monday Professional Learning session. The two ENL full time teachers participated in the monthly professional learning workshop titled Writing Strategies for ELLs presented by the Queens North Borough Field Support Center. They will also attend other workshops provided in the future by the Queens North borough Field Support Center. All teachers can participate in ELL workshops offered by the office of English Language Learners (OELL). At PS 162 we have differentiated professional learning study groups. All teachers and non-pedagogic staff are invited to join the ELL study group which explores promising practices for working with English language learners. This is the second year this group has been established. One outcome of this group is to continue creating an ELL toolkit which is shared and given to all staff members. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All teachers at PS 162 participate in their professional learning on Monday afternoons. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept for all meetings. The two ENL teachers attend ENL workshops offered at the Queens North Borough Field Support Center where attendance is taken and agendas are given out. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teachers will reach out to parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs during the Tuesday parent engagement allotted time. The ENL teachers will share the results of the NYSESLAT score reports, NYSITELL modality breakdown, classroom assessments, report card grades, and TC reading levels. Based on the individual students assessments goals will be communicated to the parents. We have a list of staff members who speak languages other than English who can provide interpretation. Also, parents can bring an adult interpreter with them. In addition, over-the-phone interpretation services can be used to communicate with our parents. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As for parental involvement, every effort will be made to involve the parents of ELLs as active partners in their child’s education through parent meetings and workshops with translators and translated notifications and handouts. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will provide ongoing assistance to the ELL parents. The parents of ELLs will be invited to take part in various school activities such as: Pumpkin Painting/Sale, PTA Meetings, and Children Around the World Moving Up ceremony. Kindergarten parents are invited to be guest readers. Parents are invited to participate in Field Day, Graduation Committee, Spring Concerts and Ballroom Dancing Performances. This year notices have already been sent regarding free Adult ESL classes at the local library. . Parents are invited to attend a Citywide Parent Workshop with translators. Each year the Parent Coordinator sends home a survey asking for parent input in order to plan future workshops addressing their needs. Parents are invited to PTA Meetings which are held both in the daytime and evening where they are given the opportunity to express their needs. Chinese interpretation was provided at most evening PTA Meetings. We have a list of staff members who speak languages other than English who can provide interpretation. Also, over - the- phone interpretation services can be used to communicate with our parents. During school activities parents can be paired with other parents who are bilingual. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pamela Lee, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 162 School DBN: 26Q162 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mrs. Pamela Lee Title Principal Mrs. Andrea Schweiger Assistant Principal Winnie Yeh Parent Coordinator Ms. Diane Popeil ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Linda Lovett Parent Mrs. Allison Solano Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Danielle Morgan Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Mrs. Aimee Serfaty School Counselor Mrs. Danielle Giunta Mrs. Rosalind Valenza Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Lindsay Lee Other ENL Teacher Mrs. Laura Amir None Other Dual Language Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q162 School Name: John Golden Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lindsay Lee ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Written and oral language preference data is collected via the following forms and entered by school staff in ATS: 1. Student Registration Form - Completed by the school office during the point of initial admissions. 2. Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) - Completed in their home language by all parents during the point of initial enrollment. 3. Emergency contact Card (Blue Card) -completed by all parents, in their home language version , at the beginning of every school year , upon enrollment in a new school, and updated as needed. Afterwards, a RAPL report is generated to have a complete list of parents' preferred language in both written and oral correspondence which will be distributed to all pertinent personnel. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 64  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Chinese Any Cantonese Greek German Korean Mandarin English Turkish (Pashto) Polish Russian Spanish 0 267 0 2 0 25 0 419 1 1 4 18 0 36.23 0 0.27 0 3.38 0 56.85 0.14 0.14 0.54 2.44 0 186 4 2 0 28 84 404 1 1 7 20 0 25.24 .54 0.27 0 3.8 11.4 54.82 0.14 0.14 0.95 2.71 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Kindergarten Handbook ENL program notices June and September School staff and Translation Unit September/Throughout the year as students admit Existing templates PTA Special PTA Events throughout the year School staff and parent volunteers. P/T conference notices Four times a year School policy changes and reminders As needed Testing Notices Trip notices After school programs As needed As needed As needed School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. 2018-19 CEP 65  School wide concerts, dance festival and art show. Pumpkin sale, book fair, plant sale, Boutique Sale As needed School staff and parent volunteers. October, May, February, or as needed. School staff and parent volunteers. Graduation and Pre-K and K moving up May/June Ballroom Dancing 5th Grade Boat Trip Fall June School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. School staff and parent volunteers. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences/Meet the teachers September, November, March and May Tuesday parent engagement time As needed on Tuesdays. ELL Parent Orientation Meetings September and throughout the year Kindergarten orientation May interpretation service(s)? Notices were sent out before each scheduled meeting in various languages. Parents were encouraged to bring in their own interpreter, over the phone interpretation services and school staff. School staff, over the phone interpretation services Chinese speaking ENL teacher, other bilingual staff members and the NYCDOE online translated videos and translated handouts/meeting notices. Bilingual school staff members. Workshops Throughout the year Bilingual school staff members. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school's Language Access Coordinator has compiled a translation/interpretation resource folder for each staff member consisting of the following items: class list of parent preferred languages, a list of bilingual staff members, language identification cards and the contact information for the over-the-phone interpreters. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 66  The school's Language Access Coordinator has compiled a translation/interpretation resource folder. Throughout the year any policy and procedure changes will be updated. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A multilingual welcome poster is posted in a prominent location near the primary entrance to our school. The translated versions of the Parents' Bill of Rights are sent home at the beginning of the year based on the RAPL report.The language ID Guide is located in the main office and at the school safety agents desk. Parents will be provided with a translated copy of the "Expect Success Guide". Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of services by analyzing the results of the parent survey. The school has recently hired a Chinese bilingual parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 67 
