2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q173 School Name: P.S. 173 FRESH MEADOWS Principal: MOLLY WANG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Fresh Meadow School 26Q173 342600010173 Pre K-5 School Number (DBN): 174-10 67 th Avenue, Fresh Meadows, New York 11361 718-358-2243 718-358-2989 Phone Number: Fax: Molly Wang MWang@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Molly Wang Kathleen Muzyka OdeliaLee Courtney Horan N/A N/A Alan Ong District Information Geographical District: 26 Superintendent’s Office Address: Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, New York 11364 DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-631-6943 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens Plaza North, 28-11 Queens Plaza North,LIC, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Molly Wang Kathleen Muzyka OdeliaLee N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Steven Gee MeritaRappaport Steven Chin Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Fotoula Katehis Thomas Gelardi Courtney Horan Theresa Maillard JingZhao Debbie Passik Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.S. 173Q is to foster an environment where children will be engaged in their learning, building on background knowledge and enhancing new learning to connect to life experience. It is our mission to provide instruction at every child’s level by teachers who will have ample opportunities to receive professional learning where they will hone their instructional practices. Our vision comes full circle with the school partnering with parents and the community to make decisions impacting on student learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  PS 173 has a strong culture of trust and respect – trust between students and students, students and teachers, teachers and parents and teachers and administration. Administration nurtures the professional growth of staff, providing time, resources and knowledge for learning. Hence, we see and feel an environment where children want to come to school, feel safe and cared for. All these go into building a collaborative and supportive environment for everyone. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 173 Queens, a 2011 National Blue Ribbon School in District 26, North Eastern Queens, is a PreK-5 school, serving nearly 1,000 students this school year. We are also the first school in our District to offer a Mandarin Dual Language Program. We have offered this program since September 2008. One of the reasons for the inauguration of this program was parent choice and our effort in supporting our School Mission. One of our core beliefs is to educate and prepare students through increasing the opportunity for them to become productive, humane, thinking citizens in our society. Learning a foreign language is one such opportunity. We will be graduating our 10th Dual Language Class this year. PS 173 has a strong culture of trust and respect – trust between students and students, students and teachers, teachers and parents and teachers and administration. Administration nurtures the professional growth of staff, providing time, resources and knowledge for learning. Hence, we see and feel an environment where children want to come to school, feel safe and cared for. All these go into building a collaborative and supportive environment for everyone. Although our children love to read and write, as a school, we have created other venues for them to grow holistically. We have a robust health and physical education program that gives the children another leverage to be an active participant in the classroom. This same program also encompasses our Student Basketball and Cheer Leaders Teams. Our children’s expressions of talent are also found in the Arts, visual and performance. PS173 has won the Morgan Library and Museum Writing Project competition in the last four years. Other visual art awards place our student work side by side with world famous artists in the Metropolitan Museum of Arts, in the State Capitol and at Tweed. Our students have “voice” at Student Government meetings, Book-of-the Month and the Kids Care Club. Other student activities organized with the help of our Parent Coordinator, are the School Band, Violin and Glee Club. This year our school is using a new science program: Amplify. This program encourages high level thinking and hands on learning. STEM work is highly visible at 173, and the integration of technology and science into the arts and content discipline is growing rapidly at each grade level. Coding is introduced at grade 1. Students incorporate their knowledge from music into their art work. Likewise, during PE lessons, students bring in their math knowledge when dealing with speed, weight and height. Like all great schools, student achievement is at the core of our work. As we strive to bring all students to their full potential, we are cognizant of how critical the roles parents play in building a supportive school environment and strong family-community ties. We continue to reach out to our parents and communities helpers to build and encourage their participation in forming partnerships with our school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  We are a school with very diverse learners. 10.3% percent of the student population are English as a New Language Learners (ENL) and 13.6% of students have Individualized Education Plan's (IEP). While the vast majority of our children are English language proficient, many still face the challenge of reading at grade level. Data shows that the majority of these students are new admits or transfers from other schools. Services for our students in need of additional support include working with a Reading Rescue teacher and/or Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Staff. Speech, SETSS, ENL, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker services that are provided throughout the grades. We also have Self-contained programs from K-5 and Integrated Collaborative Team (ICT) teaching from K-5, another way we respond to and ensure that all students have access to an engaging, rigorous and coherent curriculum that meet varied needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. An area we will be focusing on this year during professional learning is in the academic intervention service (AIS)/Response to intervention (RTI) services. We will emphasize on strengthening and improving our intervention program in the early grades. Our goal here is for every first grader to enter second grade reading and writing at proficient or above level. One way to address this need is to revisit the AIS Team’s work. Our instructional focus is to continue to improve and support teachers in engaging students through purposeful planning of lessons that are rigorous and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, and that will challenge our students to discuss and question each others' responses and thinking. We will also be focusing on students using feedback from teachers, peers and self assessment in order to transfer their learning to other subject areas. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q173 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 948 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 36 40 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 19 40 40 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 58.0% % Attendance Rate 47.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 11.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 86 85 40 96.3% 9.0% 13.6% 1.7% 58.5% 3.0% 4 8% 7.8 75.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data from TCRWP Assessment Pro, 66.15% of students were meeting TCRWP benchmarks in June 2018. 24.3% of students with disabilities were meeting TCRWP benchmarks in June 2018. That means that 33.85% of all students were not meeting grade level benchmarks and 75.7% of students with disabilities were not meeting grade level benchmarks. 100% of our staff is trained in using data from running records to inform small group instruction. Small group instruction is one of our core values. Teachers use small group instruction to both meet the needs of struggling students and to challenge students who are exceeding grade level expectations. Teachers provide students with IEPs with the Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) that is included in students' IEPs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students will be reading on grade level as measured by TCRWP running record benchmarks which will be collected 5 times per year. By June 2019, students with disabilities will make one year's growth in reading levels as measured by TCRWP running record benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and TCRWP staff developers will design professional learning for all teachers and other opportunities specific to teachers of SWDs to increase comprehension necessary for each band of levels. Workshops in formative assessment, guided reading and strategy group work will be conducted by TCRWP staff developers with paraprofessionals. Workshops about understanding the role of a paraprofessional as an instructional support for both teachers and paraprofessionals will be held. The IEP teacher will also conduct workshops about effective interventions to use with students with disabilities for teachers and paraprofessionals. Teachers will study students who are not moving reading levels to determine what is preventing them from moving up reading levels. Teachers will identify skill and strategy deficits in order to drive future instruction. New data regarding "a year's growth" will be shared with teachers. Data filtered by grade and level will also be share with teachers. Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 13, 2018 to May 2019 TC Staff Developers , Principal and Assistant Principals 21 times a year Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2018 to May 2019, 4 times a year IEP teacher, Assistant Principal Teachers and identified students November 2018- June 2019, ongoing Principal and Assistant Principals Special Education Teachers will continue to include Specially Designed Instruction in student's IEPs as well as ensure that students are receiving SDI in the classroom. Special Education Teachers Substitute teachers will read IEPs before working in classrooms with students with disabilities to ensure they meet each child's needs. Substitute Teachers Self Contained Teachers will be participating in a teacher team to study explicit instruction in order to promote student achievement. Team members will reflect on the impact their work has had on student achievement throughout the school year. Self-Contained Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Liaison Secretary, Principal, Assistant Principals Special Education Liaison, Assistant Principal September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018-June 2019, ongoing October 1, 2018-June 24, 2019, every other Monday This year there is a district wide focus on literacy in self contained classrooms which will result in inter-visitations and walk-throughs with other schools around teacher practices. Self- Contained Teachers October 2018, June Administration 2018-19 CEP 14 A variety of titles will be purchased for self contained classrooms so students have access to more books at the same level. More teachers will be trained in Reading Rescue strategies at Teachers College. The teachers and paraprofessional who have been trained in Reading Rescue will share strategies that teachers can use in the classroom. 2019, monthly Self Contained Teachers November 2018 Principal Teachers May 2019 Principal, Reading Rescue Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A Parent Workshop will be held to help parents understand the Next Generation Learning Standards in February. Parent Counseling and Training will be held for families of students with autism to help parents support their children at home. The first workshop took place in September and was held by the school social worker. The social worker will hold another session in the Spring. Teachers of students with disabilities will meet with parents on an ongoing basis to discuss student's progress and ways to support students at home. Child Mind Institute will be making presentations for parents regarding ADHD in January, February and March. We will also be sending home a survey to parents of students with disabilities to ask about what workshops they would like. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Queens North Scheduled Professional Development  Modified TCRWP curriculum with supports for students with disabilities  Data Specialist, TCWRP, Janet Steinberg  Teachers College Reading Writing Project (TCRWP) staff developers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. TCRWP running records will be administered five times throughout the year to monitor progress. By the end of January 2017, 73% of students will be reading on grade level and students with disabilities will have made half a year's worth of progress. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After a comprehensive assessment of our OORS summary report, we would like to enhance the school's approach to culture-building, discipline and teaching our students to handle challenging situations that will result in a more supportive environment and will promote student achievement. The 2016-2017 Incident Level and Infraction summary indicated the following: - Level 1: 18 - Level 2: 23 - Level 3: 113 A24: 106 - Level 4: 9 The 2017-2018 Incident Level and Infraction Summary indicated the following: - Level 1: 41 -Level 2: 9 -Level 3: 100 A24: 86 Level 4: 11 This school year the overall number of A24 incidents did decrease. However, 53% of all incidents are A24 infractions. As as school, we want to decrease the number of these types of infractions. In June, 14 students were receiving at risk counseling services in order to improve their coping strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 17  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through Social Emotional Learning (SEL) opportunities including: assemblies, student workshops, school clubs, classroom charters, and the use of a mood meter, students will develop coping strategies to handle challenging situations appropriately as measured by a 5% reduction in minor altercations and a 5% decrease in the number of students receiving at risk counseling services. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators will continue to work with the staff on the school-wide character education program (Sanford Harmony) which will involve discussions and writing responses that will center around social emotional learning. All Staff, Students September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Respect for All representative will present at a student assembly. Students Student groups will be involved in choosing 4 books for "Building a Community of Readers" initiative: September/October, November/December, January/February, and May/June. Teachers and Students Kids Care Club will continue their work with Student Council under the advisement of the Parent Coordinator so that families and school community share their voice in decision making. This group will choose service projects for the rest of the year. Grades 3-5 Students We will have an SEL and Diversity Committees that will include teachers, administrators, parents and students. Teachers, Parents, Students The Peer Mentoring Program will continue to allow fourth grade students who benefit from leadership roles to mentor first grade students who will benefit from having a role model 4th graders, 1st graders, IEP teacher Students on the SEL team (SEL Squad) will do learning walks to talk to students about how they feel in school and develop next steps to promote our SEL work.. Students October 2018 and May 2019 September 2018, October 2018, December 2018, April 2018 September 2018, November 2018, February 2018 November 2018- June 2019, 1 time per month October 2018- June 2019, weekly February 2019, May 2019 Guidance Counselor Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Principal Principal Principal, Teacher We will have the Beautiful Me program work with a group of 15 female students to encourage self confidence. Female Students, PE Teacher January 2019- March 2019, 3 Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 19  We will have a series of 6 resiliency workshops to discuss: stress management, emotions, coping skills, anger, and problem solving in classrooms. Grades 3-5 Students School adies will be trained with the Kognito program to improve teachers' relationship building with children and parents. Teachers, School Aides We will be mindful of all students' situations when planning special events such as: Grandparent's Day/Dad's Day so that all students can feel included. Students Teachers will create classroom charters with students that focus on students' feelings and ways for all students to feel safe and respected in school. We will have Learning Walks three times during the year to check on the effectiveness of the charters and learn from one another. We will also have a follow up reflection discussion of charters on October 15 and November 12. Teachers and Students Child Mind Institute, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principals Principal, Assistant Principals Teacher Leader, Principal times for each grade March 2019-June 2019, 6 times November 2018 2 times, December 2018 2 times September 2018-June 2019, ongoing September 2018, Learning Walks 3x per year (December, March, May), Follow up Meetings: October 15 and November 12 Cornelius Minor from Teachers College will be doing a workshop for teachers about equity and excellence. We will be checking the number of OORS reports that are submitted for A24. We will have a Professional Learning Opportunity in November about the "Mood Meter" for all teachers to learn how to help students identify the emotions they are feeling in order to respond appropriately. Teachers will attend a professional learning opportunity with SEL lead teachers to learn about RULER. Teachers will then implement RULER in their classrooms as a well to promote students regulating their emotions. Student Clubs will meet during lunch to foster positive social skills and making friends for students who are struggling with social skills. Teachers May 2019 Cornelius Minor (TC) SLT members January SLT Chairperson 2019, May 2019 All teachers November Assistant Principal 2018, 1 session All Teachers and Students February 2019 Principal, Lead SEL teachers Assistant Principals Students struggling with social skills September 2018- June 2019- Students meet in cycles of 6 weeks 2018-19 CEP 20 Teachers will attend a workshop to promote "stress reduction and management." Teachers will then share some of these strategies with students. One teacher and the administration will attend a workshop on implicit bias that will be presented by experts from NYU. They will then turn key what they learned to teachers. All Teachers March 2019 Principal All Teachers June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September 2018, we will be planning for the Beautiful Child workshop for parents to attend with the parent coordinator and assistant principal. The workshop will take place in March. Starting in October 2018, we will also have parents as part of our SEL committee. Two teachers will go to the PTA E-Board meeting to share the work we have been doing with social emotional learning.We will also notify parents of different events around social emotional learning that are taking place in our school using Messenger and notices. Child Mind Institute will be presenting at parent workshops about bullying in October, November and December. They will also be doing workshops on trauma psychoeducation in April, May and June. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Generation On- Kids Care Club Grant  Professional Organizations: Office of Mental Health, Office of Wellness  Parent Coordinator District Meetings  Guidance Counselor Aimee Winick    Child Mind Institute Social Worker Hannah Jung Sanford Harmony Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORS Summary Reports will be extracted four times per year to monitor progress: November 2018, January 2019, March 2019 and June 2019. By January 2019, there will be a 2.5% reduction in minor altercations when compared to the January 2018 results and a 2.5% decrease in the total number of students receiving at risk counseling services. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  OORS Summary Reports and Number of Students Receiving At Risk Counseling Services Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Advance Measure of Teacher Progress data from 2017-2018 it is evident that there are inconsistencies in Component 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction which indicates that teachers are developing their understanding of providing effective feedback and using assessment in instruction, especially formative assessment. The data results are as follows: -1.19% Developing -61.13% Effective -36.90% Highly Effective Our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year centers on the effective use of feedback in order to promote student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 20% of teachers will demonstrate an increase in at least 1 proficiency level in Domain 3 (Instruction), Component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by the use of the Danielson Framework. Teachers will improve through feedback during post observation conferences after conducting formal and informal observations. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Administrators will conduct meetings with teachers during the Initial Planning Conference (IPC) to discuss expectations for high standards in every classroom, our school-wide Instructional Focus, and goals for the year around the area of using assessment in instruction, particularly feedback. All teachers will be immersed in a series of Professional Learning sessions and study groups during the 80 minutes on Mondays. The topics will focus on providing students with actionable and relevant feedback. In the weekly prep schedule each grade will have a common planning meeting time built in. All Teachers Principal and Assistant Principals September 2018, 1x per each teacher Teachers Paraprofessionals October 1 , 2018- May 27, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Professional Learning team TCRWP staff developers will focus on the effective use of feedback to promote student achievement in reading and writing through learning walks and during professional learning. Teachers All teachers will be provided with actionable and timely verbal/written feedback that will be aligned to the Danielson rubric. In addition, they will receive next steps, opportunities for inter-class visitations, mentorship and professional articles to help improve instructional practices towards growth in providing effective feedback. We will continue to foster the practice of teachers providing students with feedback that is actionable and relevant to the curriculum. We will ensure that teachers consistently use ongoing checks for understanding to make effective adjustments to meet all students' learning needs. All Teachers Teachers A collaborative teacher team will be formed of volunteer teachers to study formative assessment and effective feedback. Teachers Total of: 14 Mondays September 2018-May 2019 21 Times October 2018 - May 2019, ongoing September 2018- May 2019, ongoing October 22, 2018, January 15, 2018 and Principal, TCRWP staff Principal, Assistant Principals Principal and Assistant Principals Administration 2018-19 CEP 24 One teacher will attend the District Workshops about providing effective feedback and then will turnkey what they learned to all teachers at our school. Teachers April 18, 2018 October 2018- March 2019, 5 times District Leadership 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and the principal will coordinate a workshop for parents to help them understand the role of formative assessment and feedback. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Coverages for interclass visitations ● Professional Books for Book Clubs ● Monthly meetings with the Professional Learning Team ● Weekly Prep Schedule will include a common planning period ● Bi-monthly meetings with the grade level leaders ● Creation of a teacher collaborative team focusing on formative assessment Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The overall cycle and anticipated benchmarks for the Danielson observations are as follows: 11/18: 25% completion 01/19: 41% completion 03/19: 78% completion 2018-19 CEP 25  05/19: 100% completion By January 2019, 10% of teachers will show an increase in the observation ratings for Component 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports- Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2016-2017, the principal participated in the Cahn Fellows program. She attended the retreats and monthly workshops. She shared what she learned with 9 teachers and helped to promote and build teacher leadership capacity from within the school. Throughout the school year, teachers worked on selected projects that impacted student learning and contributed teacher personal and professional growth. During the 2015-2016 school year, 2% of pedagogues were involved in teacher leadership roles. During the 2017-2018 school year, many more teachers took on leadership roles and we met our goal of increasing the number of teacher leaders in our school. These are some examples of our teachers in leadership roles:  New and/or struggling teachers were supported from Certified Mentor teachers.  Newly established teacher teams, the facilitation and organization of the RTI program, Reading Rescue, and creating and managing ENL resources will need support from a mentor or teacher leader.  The Learner Center Initiative (LCI) will need support for school-wide implementation by the Principal and teacher leader.  A paraprofessional led our staff in many healthy and wellness workshops during PL time.  Teachers ensured the continuation of partnership with Morgan Museum and Library, Teachers College, Queens College, St Johns University, Asian Society and New York University.  Teachers hosted student teachers from higher education institutions and continue to facilitate Morgan Library Art Project within the school.  Teachers ensured continued collaboration with Pre-K Instructional Consultant throughout the year extending teacher participation to study group with District Pre-K teachers.  ENL and Dual Language teachers shared best practices with schools from District 26 and District 25 in building an effective ENL/Dual Language Program. Many of our teachers have taken on leadership roles and we would like to continue this work by having our students take on more leadership roles. One way to do this is to have students participate in more self assessment which includes giving themselves feedback. This is also a major part of our instructional focus. Our school leaders including the administration and teachers will continue to develop students' abilities to accurately self assess. We notice inconsistencies in the opportunities students are being given to engage in self assessment as well as in students' abilities to self assess. We took a survey of teachers at the end of the 2017-2018 school year. The "Teacher Self Assessment Survey" revealed the following: The frequency that students are self assessing is inconsistent across classrooms. In some classrooms, self assessment is a daily task while in others teachers reported having their students assess 5 times a year at the end of each writing unit. 2018-19 CEP 27  - All teachers ask students to self assess. However, the number of times students were asked to self assess was inconsistent. The numbers ranged from 10 times a year to 4 times a week. - 96% of teachers agreed with the statement: Most of my students engage in self-assessment tasks when asked to do so. -68% of teachers agreed with the statement: Most of my students show they are able to provide themselves with effective feedback by recognizing areas when they need to improve and areas where they are doing well. -54% of teachers agreed with the statement: Most of my students show they are able to provide themselves with effective feedback, by not only recognizing the areas where they need to improve/areas where they are doing well but can also identify how to improve in those areas. -50% of teachers agreed with the statement: Most of my students use the feedback they give themselves to improve the quality of their work. -11% of teachers agreed with the statement: Most of my students engage in self-assessment independently (without you asking them to self-assess.) -79% of teachers agreed with the statement: I consistently give students opportunities to self-assess both during and at the end of units. -46% of teachers agreed with the statement: I ask students to self-assess equally during all subject areas. From this data we can therefore tell that teachers recognize the importance of self assessment and therefore give their students opportunities to self assess. However there are inconsistencies in when students are self assessing as well as the quality of the feedback they give themselves. Teacher team data reflects the following: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through teacher team cycles centered on feedback and collaborative conversations during post observation feedback sessions, 80% of students will be able to effectively self-assess as evidenced by student goal setting and an increase in results of the "Teacher Self Assessment Survey." 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Mentor teachers will be certified by New Teacher Center (NTC) system to work with new or identified teachers. Mentor teachers will be assigned mentees and will discuss the role of self assessment and feedback. New teachers and teachers new to a grade September 2018- June 2019, Principal and mentor teachers TCRWP staff developers will meet in cycles of study groups that will focus on self assessment. Teachers meeting in these study groups will share what they learned with their grades. 2x/week per teacher All teachers October 2018 to May 2019 21 times a year Study groups will be held for teachers so they can learn more about effective ways of including self-assessment in instruction across subject areas. All teachers October 2018 to May 2019 Teachers will be given feedback regarding the use of self assessment during post observation conferences. All teachers October Principal, TCRWP staff developers Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers 2018-May 2019, ongoing October 2018-June 2019, ongoing Students in leadership roles will model effective ways of self assessing. Students Teacher Teams will center their work around the effective use of feedback. They will meet during Professional Learning time to engage in an inquiry process to track student growth and discuss best practices around self assessment. All teachers October 2018-May 2019, 14 Mondays Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers will be given opportunities for inter visitation in order to visit other classrooms and observe teachers' using strategies that promote effective self assessment. Lead teachers will also coach other teachers in the effective use of self assessment. All teachers November 2018 - May 2019, ongoing Administration The Principal will organize a "School Pipeline for Leaders" that will be called the SEALS. This group will include teachers who want to pursue leadership roles. These teachers will build capacity around self assessment. Principal Teachers looking to pursue leadership roles December 2018, February 2019, May 2019 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through workshops and informal dialogues with administrators and staff parents will develop an understanding of Effective School Leadership and self assessment. Workshops will be held for parents to discuss confidence and other important social emotional learning topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments for the teacher leaders to support initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of teachers will feel that students are able to effectively self-assess by setting goals for themselves or giving themselves actionable and specific feedback as evidenced by a teacher survey. Teacher Team data will also indicate improvement in the area of self assessment as evidenced by students' goal setting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Team Data, Teacher Self Assessment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. Only when parents are “educated” and informed by schools will they be able to assist their children. In that vein, we actively seek the participation of our parents at PTA meetings where we do the vast majority of our sharing and community outreach. From the Parent Coordinator’s feedback, we surfaced the need for more workshops touching on learning across the grades as well as workshops that provide social and emotional wellness such as a dancing and singing session, a yoga and/or exercise class. In order to increase parental involvement we will survey parents about the time and topics of interest that best suit them. Additionally, we will involve Staff members and students at PTA meetings. We use notices, our school website, and messenger to notify parents of school events. We are noticing that some of the contact information we have isn't updated. We therefore will be collecting updated contact information so that parents can be notified on messenger using the call system. We will also be collecting parents' cell phone numbers so that they can be contacted via text message since some families prefer that type of communication. We will also collect e-mail addresses so we can e-mail parents. Parent Coordinator Workshops- 4 events: 125 parents Administration/Teacher led workshops-- 4 events: 132 parents PTA Meetings -7 events: 377 parents School Events- 7 events: 964 parents Volunteer Events - 17 events: 964 parents Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the entire school community will share instructional practices and Social Emotional Learning (SEL) initiatives in a way that empowers and encourages families to use and understand our school's mission and instructional focus to promote dialogue between teachers, parents and students centered on student learning and success. Strong Family Community Ties will increase from 4.25 to 4.30 on the survey element scores from the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators and Staff explain school’s expectations of student learning and achievement in the various subjects during Back to School Night. All parents September 17, 2018 Dual Language Teachers will hold a series of parent workshops throughout the year to support their students in learning Chinese and English. Parents September 2018-June 2019 4 times per year Parent Coordinator, Social Worker and Guidance Counselor will present workshops at PTA meetings on topics such as “Transitioning into a new grade” and other parent skill training. All Parents May 2019 To build trust, respect and stronger ties, workshops for school Staff conducted jointly by parents, teachers and community members will provide an understanding of the different cultural practices around the school. Parent Coordinator will hold workshops entitled: "Our Family Crest," "Giving Thanks for Grandparents," and "Holiday Traditions, Snacks & Snowflakes." Parent Coordinator will conduct ongoing parent surveys to gather information about parent-teacher communication. The surveys will be analyzed and data disseminated to the teachers for ongoing teacher feedback and measures of improvement. Teachers will use the data to continue to plan for effective teacher communication. Acknowledge and celebrate student achievement and success such as Citizen of the Month, Talent Show, Spelling Bee, debaters and other such events at PTA meetings in addition to inviting community talent such as a florist, dancer, chef, performer and safety personnel (fire fighters, police officers & Health Care Providers) to share expertise. Parents and Staff Parents and Teachers Parents and Staff All school memos will be translated into Chinese and Spanish. Parents September 2018, October 2018, December 2018 September 2018 -June 2019, ongoing October 2018 through June 2019 Once a month September 2018-June 2019, ongoing Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Administrators, Parent Coordinator Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor District Parent Advocate, Parents, Community leaders, Parent Coordinator and Staff Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers, Students, Administrators Administrators, Staff, Parents 2018-19 CEP 32 We will host a food event so that different cultures can be represented and our community can learn about each other. All parents and students January 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA Mighty Mondays will be planned each month to discuss what parents want more information about. For example, the May meeting will focus on running records and reading strategies. All parents We will host a Career Day so that parents and community members can share their careers the students of our school. All students Kindergarten Orientation will be held to introduce incoming kindergarten families to our school and school community. Child Mind Institute will make 9 presentations during parent workshops on topics including: bullying, ADHD and trauma psychoeducation. Incoming kindergarten families Parents Principal Administration, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator November 2018 -June 2019- 10 times January 2019 June 13, 2019 October 30, November 27, December 4, January 22, February 26, March 26, April 30, May 7, May 28 Konstella will be piloted in order to test out a new system for a streamlined approach to digital communication. Our PTA president and vice president will present at a meeting with teachers so teachers can learn about Konstella. A workshop will be held by the lead SEL teachers to teach parents about the work that has been done with the Mood Meter and charters in our school. Test group of parents and teachers November 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA Parents February 2019 Lead SEL teacher A workshop will be held to share information about state testing with parents. Parents in Grades 3-5 March 2019 Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Fresh Meadow Home Civic Association Student and Adult ENL program Kuei Luck Enrichment Center TCRWP parent fall and spring workshops St. John's University Morgan Museum and Library Child Mind Institute 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators, CBO, District Parent Advocate ,students and Community partnerships such as St John’s University, Queens College, New York University, Teachers College and Fresh Meadow Homeowners Civic Association Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as evidenced ed by a school-created survey mimicking the LES for Strong Family/Community Ties, we will produce a score of 90% satisfaction rate (leading to the June 2018 goal of 4.3). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Quality Guide (Survey mimicking the School Quality Guide) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) *Students reading at or below alevel 2 as determined by their running records. *Students who are level 1 in writing as determined by daily class work. *Grades 4-5 State exam results Mathematics *Pre and post tests *Exemplars *Grades 4-5 State exam results *Pre and post unit tests * Students reading at or below a level 2 in the content area, and struggling in project-based research/report. *Teacher and Parent recommendations Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) * Reading Rescue *SPIRE *Fundations *Repeated reading *Research based effective ENL practices * Envisions * Teacher created materials *Teacher created materials aligned with State Science Scope and Sequence. * Interactive writing Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) *Small group, tutoring and one on one. *During school. *Small group *During school *Small group *During school *Small group * During school *Interactive talk *One on one or in groups * Games *During school 2018-19 CEP 35  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) resulting from home or school incidents. *Peer Intervention Techniques" 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not applicable Not applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37 Support students with funds for class trips, school supplies and graduation fee. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $7600 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not applicable 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not applicable Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not applicable 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 173Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS173Q will support parents and families of students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parents of participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS173Q School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS173Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 44  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 46  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have 118 English Language Learners (ENLs)in our school. Based on the Chancellor's vision in building a strong foundation of learning in the lower primary, we are taking the initiative of servicing our 1 and 2 grade ENL as our priority. We will also be servicing our beginner English Language Learners. The results from the survey sent to ENL parents in grades 1-5, indicated that the preference is for a supplementary program on Saturday morning (9-12 noon) starting November 3, 2018 through March 30, 2018 contingent on funding, for a total of 10 sessions. From the classroom and ENL teachers' viewpoint, identified for the supplementary program will benefit from: A program where there's an abundance of speaking opportunities as well as multiple opportunities for the students to listen to English language native speakers model the language in such activities as Read Aloud and Shared Reading. Teachers will use ENL methodology such as Total Physical Responses, visual, music, plays and Big Book reading. Some supplemental materials recommended for the program are: REACH to Literacy - "Eyewitness Readers" level 1-3; National Geographic news, Rigby Lighthouse Guided Reading sets and Non fiction sets by Joy Crowley (Shared Reading sets). Suggestions for the 3- hour program schedule tentatively reads: 9-9:15 Morning routines with greetings, calendar, reviews of previous lessons using chants, echo read, TPR and music. 9:15 - 10:15 Shared Reading and and small group work on writing and math. 10:15 - 10:30 Snack/PE/Music 10:30-11:30 Learning centers alternating with neighborhood walk to bakery, fire house and supermarket. 11:30-12 Read Aloud The language of instruction will be English for ENL classes. We will also have one Chinese Class for Dual Language Learners and the language of instruction will be Mandarin Chinese. We will invite 3 ENL certified teachers and 1 bilingual teacher to be in our program. All of the teachers are highly qualified teachers who know , understand and have passion about teaching ENL students. We will have records of this program such as student attendance, program notification in parents' preferred languages and other related materials stored in ENL department. The materials we use in this program are supplemental and distinct from those used in daily classroom instructions. This year we are focusing on building vocabulary in the content area and word problems in Math. This is also true for English-proficient students in the Dual Language program.This program will build on student's knowledge in social studies, science, PE and the Arts to increase vocabulary learning even further. Teachers will plan trips around the neighborhood, invite parents of ENL students as speakers on related topics as well as working on hands on activities such as cooking and dancing. Teachers will also assess for growth in student language acquisition using leveled books and teacher created assessment. In order to maximize and move ELL learning in writing and content knowledge, these students will get at least an hour of writing instruction during the 3-hour program. The language of instruction will be English supported by the use of either Chinese or Spanish with some students. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information All ENLs will be using video cameras/computer/notebook as part of their learning; this activity affords ENLs multiple opportunities for speaking and dramatization. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: It is the belief of our school that the success of ENLs is the responsibilities of ALL teachers, not just the ENL or bilingual teachers. As a result, all Title III teachers must be able and willing to serve this population as best they can. The Title III teachers will engage in teacher team inquiry cycles around an ENL area of focus and the targeted students will be ENL beginners. In addition, the professional learning sessions will be facilitated by administration, ENL teachers and Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Staff Developers. Tentative TCRWP workshops schedule and topics is as below: 1. Join Us in Welcoming a New Member of the Family: Phonics Unit of Study for First Grade by Natalie Louis ( TCRWP staff developer) on Tuesday September 25, 2018. 2. Spelling Based Approaches to Phonics by Patricia Cunningham (TCRWP staff developer) on Thursday, October 11, 2018 3. Teaching Grammar in Context: Practical, Writerly Instruction to Support Student Growth and Engagement by Jeff Anderson (TCRWP staff developer) on Thursday, October 11 2018. 4. Supporting Students in Beginning Stages of Language Acquistion by Amanda Hartman and Shana Frazin ( TCRWP staff developers) on Monday, November 5, 2018. 5. Support Students Learning English as a New Language Navigate Nonfiction Texts: Building Academic Language and Strengthening Comprehension Skills by Amanda Hartman and Hareem Atif Khan ( TCRWP staff developers) on Tuesday, February 26 2019. This year as part of the Monday 80-minutes professional learning, we have built in several workshops for both classroom teachers as well as service providers including ENL teachers. The professional learning sessions will be ongoing all year and will be conducted in cycles. We will be also working to collaborate with classroom teachers in our school to design projects and lesson plans for and with ENL teachers. We will use Monday PD sessions to provide in-house workshops. Additionally, ENL and bilingual teachers will also attend workshops given by NYCDOE Div.of ENL Support, Queens North Borough Support Center and NYS TESOL. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Starting in September 2018, our administration have planned several workshops throughout the year for ENL parents. Parent workshops varied in time, topics and presenters. Workshops will focus on information sharing, knowledge building and assistance providing to ENL parents. ELL parents will get an invitation (translated into their Native language) 2-3 weeks before the workshop to inform them of the upcoming event. Tentative topics and schedules are as followed: 1. "Reading and understanding NYSESLAT progress report" -- September/October ( 45 minutes/ one session each month) 2. How to help your child in reading and writing at home?" --November/December ( 45 minutes/one session each month) 3." Understanding ESSA"--January/February ( 45 minutes/one session each month) 4. " Know your right and responsibilities!" --March/April ( 45 minutes/ one session each month) 5. " Empowering you child and yourself!"--May/June ( 45 minutes/ one session each month) Each parent workshop will be 45 minutes. There will be two sessions for each topic. We will be providing 10 sessions for the above five topics this school year. All of the above workshops will be conducted by ENL team in Mandarin Chinese, Spanish and English depending on parents' use of language by bilingual ENL teachers in ENL team. Our ENL team members are : Joanne Wang, Rhea Newman, Ligia Hanc, PeiYu Chang and Juan Cheng . All of the teachers listed above are ENL certified teachers, and we will also invite Mr. Peter Lee who is our bilingual special education teacher to be part of the parent workshop. All of us will l be either presenting or assisting during the workshop sessions. Since many of our parents are new immigrants, there is a need for workshops that deal with understanding the City public school system and ways to help their children not only to achieve academic excellence in education, but also to know and to understand more about this new environment . After each workshop, all attendees will be given an evaluation form to rate the workshop, as well as give feedback on other matters of interest for future workshops. We will continue to monitor ENL parent needs through meetings and looking at their requests for assistance. At the same time, we will provide translation and interpretation and assistance with all school matters. Agendas, parent workshop attendance sheets, invitations in different languages and other related documents will be stored in ENL department . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Direct instruction - Four teachers and one administrator: Per Session: $9,181.50 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 teachers x 3hrs = 12 hrs a week x 10 weeks = 120 hrs X $60.65= $7,278.00 1 Admin x 3 hrs= 3 hrs a week x 10 sessions = 30hrs x $63.45 = $1,903.50 Per Session total: $9,181.50 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Per Diem for attending ENL PD: $1,549.10 Total: $10,730.60 Purchased services  High quality staff Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TC Staff Development Program--PD for ENL teachers $154.91x 5 sessions x 2 teachers=$1,549.10 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Total: $2,604.40 N/A N/A Parent Involvement: $ 1,463 Parent Workshop $ 1,213 Parent engagement $250 Notebooks, Folders, Clipboards, Glues, Construction papers, markers, pencils and Teaching Resources: Reach Program--student library books, big books, Reading A-Z subscriptions for Title III Saturday Program. Total: $2,604.40 N/A N/A Parent workshops will be given to ENL parents for topics as followed: "How to help your child with homework?", " Understaning ESSA", " Know your right and responsibilites!" etc... 2 teachers x 10 x $60.65 =$1,213 Waters, light refreshments and materials for parent engagement= $ 250 2018-19 CEP 52 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $ 14,798 TOTAL $14,798 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Fresh Meadow School Borough Queens School Number 173 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Molly Wang Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joanne Wang Teacher/Subject Area Rhea Newman / ENL Teacher/Subject Area Courtney Horan / Sp.Ed. Related-Service Provider Terry Hornug-Rudolph / OT Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Denise Gilrane Coach N/A School Counselor Aimee Winick Parent Stephen Chow Parent Coordinator Jean Mendler Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) Odalis DeJesus/Asst. Principal C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 931 Total number of ELLs 107 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.49% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Mandarin 2007 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Program to assess the early literacy levels of our ELLs. The data shows what reading levels the children have accomplished. This assessment is performed at four different periods throughout the year. According to the data, the ELL average reading level as of September 2015, was around a Level 1 . -56.06% of ELL students are reading at a Level 1 -30.30% of ELL students are reading at a Level 2 -10.61% of ELL students are reading at a Level 3 -3.03% of ELL students are reading at a Level 4 One trend that is very evident from the spring 2017, 56.72% of ELL students made no change in their reading levels. These students consisted mainly of Kindergarten and First Grade students. From the June 2015 to September 2016 assessment, 2018-19 CEP 55  40.2% made no change in their reading levels, while 4.02% have regressed in their reading levels over the summer. This information can help our school’s ELL progression by looking into ways to help our ELLs' reading practices and strategies improve. Strategies need to be improved especially at the end of the year in order to maintain or increase their reading levels over the summer. This would amount to a strong effort to reduce the amount of students who regress from the June assessment to the September assessment. Although it is not uncommon for students to drop in their reading levels over the summer, it is highest among ELLs. One strategy to reduce the extent of regression would be their attendance in summer school programs in addition to increased parent support for students to read more over the summer months. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school uses the data from the TC assessments along with the ELA and NYSESLAT results to provide insight on how to plan instruction. The ENL teachers collaborate with the classsroom teachers and other service providers to discuss the appropriate plan to support the ELLs. This support can be in the form of small group work on a specific skill or strategy in either the push in or pull out model. ENLteachers meet with classroom teachers with ELL students during their grade meetings in order to be up to date on classroom instruction and collaborate with teachers on best ways to meet the needs of the ELLs. Also, ENL teachers will join the classroom teachers for professional development specific to ENL instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success is evaluated by ongoing observations, performance on ELA and NYSSELAT, and also by their ability to answer questions from authentic texts. Another consideration is how much growth is achieved by students from the instruction of content knowledge which is evaluated through periodic assessments based on units of study. We also use the bilingual progressions to determine student progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered we run the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) to analyze and determine the population of students (students with IEPs, long term ELLs, SIFE, etc.) that need support. We can also look at the students' ENL and at risk levels. Then, we share that information with colleagues and administration and discuss the appropriate Tier 1 and 2 interventions needed to support the students needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school implements the Rti framework by providing small group and individual targeted instruction based on data obtained through EDAT and other classroom observations and assessments. Based on the assessment data of our ELL students we are able to design and Rti program for their individual needs. For long term ELLs or students who have remained at the same level for more than one year we design an Rti program for them. For example, If a student is showing a deficit in a particular modality such as reading or speaking, we are able to focus the Rti in that area. In those cases we can provide Tier II or Tier III intensive instruction in a small group that focuses on a specific area of need. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use data from EDAT, including NYSESLAT scores to help inform our ELL programs. For example, we are able to look at the data results for each modality and determine small groups based on that information. If we notice that most students have passed the listening modality but are still not able to pass the reading and writing, we plan our groups accordingly. Also, we notice at which grades and proficiency levels the students are struggling with specific modalities so we are able to focus in on specific skills and strategies to target their needs. We use data from the ELA, as well. We can determine which of the ELLs have shown growth as their English proficiency increased or if we notice students who remain on the same ENL proficiency level and ENL level, we can create groups to work on intensive intervention on specific areas of need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once we have analyzed the data from the EDAT (including NYSESLA, ELA and Math state tests) we use that information to adjust our programs. We use the information to reflect on the interventions that were successful and determine how we can 2018-19 CEP 56  continue or build on that success. We also look at areas of need in the programs and come up with ideas on how to improve those areas. For example, if the data indicates that EN level ELLs are not improving in the speaking area, we will adjust our program to provide more small group work with students in that area of need. We adjust our instruction throughout the year based on data from EDAT, observations, assessments and student progress. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 173 we utilize two programs to provide ENL services in the most effective formats possible for our students. These include the Freestanding ENL program in grades K-5. The services the students receive will vary according to their mandated requirements. We also have a Dual Language program on each of grades one through five. In the Freestanding ENL program the stand alone model is instruction designed to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. The stand alone model is provided to students who are at the Entering and Emerging levels. The students are pulled out of their classroom for 180 minutes and are grouped by proficiency levels. These students also receive an additional 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. The integrated ENL model is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. This model is provided to students who are at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. They receive 180 minutes of this model of instruction. In our school this service is provided in two ways. One way the integrated model is provided is by a classroom teacher who is dually certified in ENL and common branches or content area. The second way the integrated model is provided is by the co-teaching (pushing in) method in which a certified ENL teacher pushes in to the classroom of a certified common branches teacher and works with small groups of ELLs to support the content being taught in the classroom. In the integrated model the students are in the same grade but may be at varying proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE program is not offered in our school. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program provides instruction in reading, writing, math, and social studies in English for half of instructional time and in Chinese (Mandarin) for half of the instructional time. The students develop the content and concept knowledge in content areas in Mandarin. On the days that the students are learning in English, the teacher provides small group instruction supporting English language development. Also, ENL teachers push in and pull out to work with small groups based on their mandatory minutes of ENL services. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels in each program the ENL teachers plan their schedules according to the individual mandated times for each ELL student. We provide a 2018-19 CEP 57  combination of stand alone and integrated ENL instruction in order to make sure that each student is receiving at least the minimum amount of services required by the state. Those requirements are: Entering: 180 mins. stand alone and 180 mins. integrated Emerging: 90 mins. stand alone and 180 mins. integrated and 90 mins. either stand alone or integrated Transitioning: 90 mins. integrated and 90 mins. either stand alone or integrated Expanding: 180 mins. integrated Commanding: 90 mins. integrated HLA minutes are provided in our Dual Language program. In our school, Home Language Instruction is delivered in Mandarin only. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is aligned with the CCLS and taught to ELLs using a variety of ENL methodology. The language of instruction is English in the Freestanding ENL program. In the Dual Language program the language of instruction is in English for half of instruction time (2 1/2 days) and in Chinese (Mandarin) for the other half of instruction time. Academic language and content area vocabulary are developed concurrently with linguistic instruction. ENL teachers use the Scope and Sequence in Social Studies and Science to align ENL instruction with content area instruction. ENL teachers use multiple entry points when teaching groups with varying proficiency levels in order to differentiate the lessons to meet individual student’s needs. ENL teachers are trained in Maryann Cucchiara’s method of teaching ELLs by using complex texts and sentences to teach content and academic vocabulary simultaneously with grammar. We also use National Geographic’s REACH program which also embeds language structure and content into one program. Both REACH and Maryann Cucchiara’s programs have a strong emphasis on non-fiction reading and writing and are aligned with the CCLS. We utilize other TESOL techniques such as Total Physical Response and the use of visuals help students to conceptualize the information they need to learn. Classroom teachers scaffold academic language in order to support student participation in content area lessons. Comprehension is enhanced through the use of technology, especially the Promethean Board which allow access to multiple applications used to support the varying needs of the ELLs. We also use content that is culturally relevant to the students and build on the skills they already have. There is ongoing articulation between the classroom and ENL teachers in order to provide simultaneous support. Classroom teachers receive training and support throughout the year to enrich their knowledge of ENL methodology in order to further new language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have many different languages spoken by the ELLs in our school therefore we don't have a system for evaluating all students in their home language. However, we do evaluate all students in the DL language program in their home language periodically throughout the school year in grades 1-5. In addition, at the end of the school year, students in DL program in grades 3-5 are given a state test to determine their reading proficiency in Mandarin. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for our ELL subgroups in the following ways:a) SIFE: Although we do not presently have any SIFE students, if we did we would give the NYSITELL and upon findings formulate a student specific plan for intense support. Being at least two years behind academically we would focus on the skills of language acquisition in an authentic learning environment. ENL teachers would work very closely with classroom teachers to provide intensive instruction with all ENL teaching strategies and scaffolding.b) Newcomer: ELLs who are new to the country need intensive instruction in all modalities. During the stand alone component of instruction there will be more emphasis on grammar and sentence structure. During the integrated component, the ENL teacher who is pushing in can pull a small group of newcomers and scaffold the content and vocabulary being taught in the classroom. One example is by using visuals and linguistic frames to make the content more 2018-19 CEP 58  accessible.c) Developing: ELLs in school less than three years but more than one will have to take the ELA. Therefore, vocabulary, grammar, reading, and writing skills will be emphasized. ENL Teachers use on-line ENL interactive learning programs to familiarize them with the type of questions they will encounter on the ELA. Both standalone and integrated instruction will reinforce their content and language learning at their respective grade levels. d) Long Term: Students receiving services for 4-6 years will usually show evidence of a particular area of need that is preventing them from passing the NYSESLAT. We provide intensive focus on those areas including but not limited to the provision of ENL support beyond their mandated requirements. We also recommend that they attend our afterschool ELA test preparation club.e) Former ELLs – up to 2 years after exiting ELL status: Former ELLs in our school receive 2 years of support services. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction to provide additional support. In addition, they may receive testing accomodations for 2 years after passing the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special education and ENL teachers, as well as service providers, employ a vast array of instructional strategies and grade level materials to both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate the English language development of ELL-SWD students.In math, differentiated workbooks are used to provide different approaches to master topics, along with manipulatives which provide for hands-on and visual practice. Curriculum software programs projected from Smartboards facilitate interactive learning and foster increased student engagement. Grade level literacy units of study and lessons, along with comprehensive classroom libraries including numerous picture books provide materials appropriate to meet diverse interests, learning styles and ability levels, as well as IEP goals.Decoding and word work is supported by highly effective programs such as Words Their Way, and listening centers work on matching print to speech. Social studies materials include geography packets with visual cues, Scholastic News on Smartboards, picture cards and vocabulary. Science involves hands-on, multi-sensory inquiries and includes review and repeated activities when required. Technology provides access to Brainpop, My Capstone Library, and a variety of interactive reteaching and engaging activities. Speech teachers provide valued support to classroom instruction in many manners. Vocabulary intervention takes the form of three tiers: tier 1 is commonly used words, tier 2 is highly functional, and tier 3 focuses on content area words. They use wordless books with pictures for sequencing, interactive writing, practice patterns in sentences, scaffold word learning across modalities and contexts, self talk strategies, and oral language practice to encourage classroom discussion. Additional scaffolds integrated throughout the school day include: thinking maps and other graphic organizers, rhymes, poems, charts, songs, journal writing, Rosetta Stone, tiered word walls and TPR (total physical response). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? There is ongoing communication between ENL teachers, service providers, and classroom teachers. Providers make every effort to coordinate the time of their service with the classroom flow of the day to be most effective. ENL teachers collaborate with and support classroom teachers by aligning their instruction with the standards and incorporating social studies, science and math on each grade level. Classroom teachers provide communication sheets providing ELA and math skills to be targeted. Speech teachers and ENL teachers push in to deliver services and support teachers within the classroom setting, sometimes co-teaching. Small group instruction also reinforces support in areas of need. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas focus on those students receiving services for more than three years. The language of instruction is English in the Freestanding ENL program. In the Dual Language program the language of instruction in English for half of the instruction time (2 1/2 days) and in Chinese (Mandarin) for the other half of instruction times. This is the subgroup of students who have not reached proficiency level. Because the NYSESLAT becomes increasingly more difficult as the students progress from grade to grade, these are the students who face the possibility of becoming LTEs if they are not able to test out by the end of their sixth year. Additional support for these students comes in the form of additional programs and additional instruction. Programs to provide additional support outside of the regular school day will be offered to these students either after school or on Saturdays or both (when budget or grants 2018-19 CEP 59  permit). Both programs are aimed to support language acquisition, content areas and test preparation. Additional instructional support in content areas including literacy, math, science and social studies will be provided via a collaborative effort among our classroom, ENL and science and math teachers, as well as our literacy coach and reading specialist. We will work together to provide more types of hands-on learning experiences, and use engaging texts to improve student fluency and related reading skills. Furthermore, additional services (over and above mandated requirements) will be provided during the regular school day according to the needs specific to each student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the EDAT data we found that many ELLs who started the program in grades 3-5 made slower progress than the ELLs in grade K-2. Last year we implemented the National Geographic REACH program which incorporates language instruction into content area units. The program utilizes engaging texts which we are able to differentiate for our students. We plan to continue to use and grow this program as part of the ENL instruction. We have also been using Discussions 4 Learning as a supplement to build oral vocabulary among ELLs. We also plan to use multicultural mentor texts as read alouds to support vocabulary, grammar, and other language acquisition. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to discontinue any of our ELL programs or services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are provided equal access to all school programs by their placement in general education classrooms, and by attending all specialty classes such as physical education, music, art, technology, and science along with the rest of their classmates. They also participate in all school afterschool programs, band, ballroom dance, glee club, school performances, violin, sports teams and Citizen of the Month Assemblies. All progams that take place during and after school time are inclusive of ELLs. Letters and notices that go home about these programs are provided in the home language of the ELLs. The after school programs consist of mini-clubs that provide enrichment in a variety of areas that enhance language and vocabulary for all ELLs. We have mini-clubs in test preparation, chess, sports, cooking, science, etc. In addition to the clubs we provide extra academic support to ELL students using Title III funding. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials including technology used to support ELLs include but are not limited to: •Smartboards-used for all subgroups to provide curriculum content and visuals. •Desktop computers-used in the classrooms for research and for use of Rosetta Stone Language Learning. •Document Cameras-used for all subgroups to display exemplar student work, shared writing, close reading. •Netbook/Laptops-used in the classroom for research as well as for use of Better Chinese software. •Rosetta Stone Language Learning Success-used in the classrooms for further enhance students' understanding of the English language. •The Oxford Picture Dictionary for Kids-used in Dual Language classes as well as for beginner, intermediate and advanced subgroups for use during writing and speaking. •Foreign language glossaries for Math and Science-used in the upper elementary grades to gain understanding of content and vocabulary. •Math for the Real World •Phonics for the Real World •SRA Photo Library-used to further enhance vocabulary through the use of visuals. •Better Chinese Books on Software-used for all Dual Language students to further enhance their understanding of the language. •Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study-used in the classroom for all subgroups-differentiated by need. •Big Books-used in lower elementary grades for comprehension, grammar and vocabulary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 60  Home language support is provided in each program model. Dictionaries, content area glossaries, and texts are available in the students’ native languages whenever possible to scaffold transition to higher levels. To the extent possible ENL classrooms contain books in our students’ native languages, and ENL teachers deliver limited instruction in native languages to support understanding in content and informational areas. In our Dual Language classes instruction is delivered equally in both languages throughout the entire week. Materials used in the Dual Language classes are content specific books in social studies and science, fiction and nonfiction texts. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to our ELLs age and grade levels. For lower grades we provide more visual and hands-on resources. For higher grades the focus is more on reading and writing exercises and materials. If an upper grade student cannot read we provide picture books that correspond to grade appropriate content, but emphasize pictures and more simple text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We use Title III funding to plan an orientation for newly enrolled ELL students shortly before the beginning of the school year. It includes a walkthrough of the building, an introduction to some of the teachers, and a question and answer session for parents. Our goal is to acclimate the students to our school environment so that they are comfortable and familiar with the setting on opening day. The staff involved includes an ENL teacher, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator. Also, our school has and orientation for Kindergarten students which includes parents of new ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives to our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our Dual Language program instructional time is divided equally between English and Mandarin. The students are integrated all day. Content areas are not taught separately. Instruction is separated by time and teacher, and both languages are taught simultaneously. We follow the side-by-side model and teachers alternate days with the classes (one day English instruction, the next day Chinese). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ENL teachers are trained in and participate fully in all professional learning as the rest of the school staff. In addition, there will be times when ENL teachers will be asked to present on ENL strategies and understanding multi culturalism to teachers of ELLs as well as the whole staff including para-professionals. ENL teachers also attend workshops that pertain to instructional 2018-19 CEP 61  practices geared for ELLs. Such training is given by District , Borough and the Office of ELLs at Central. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Administration, all licensed ENL teachers, and common branch teachers pursuing ENL certification attend workshops presented by DELLSS, Columbia Teachers College, NYU Steinhardt School, and District 26 network, and then turnkey their training to staff at grade level and faculty meetings. Also, Teachers College sends trainers that provide in-house staff development specific for ENL teachers. These workshops provide the 50% of total hours that ENL teachers receive each year. A record of attendance for these professional development workshops are kept by the school secretary and the ENL department. A copy of the agenda and notes/handouts from the workshops are kept in the ENL department. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the start of the school year the families of ELLs are provided with a copy of their child's NYSESLAT results including the overall level and the scores of each modality. These results along with ELA results are tools we use to explain the goals for our program and the individual student's goals. Parents of ELLs meet throughout the year (in addition to the 4 mandated Parent/Teachers Conferences) to talk about student progress as well as school and home support for the students. Other topics at these meetings includes State assessments, as well as individual teacher's testing policies. These meetings are mostly scheduled at the beginning of the school year and again in mid year and before the school last marking period. Individual meetings with ELL parents, phone calls and letters are translated or we provide a translator from the school staff or from Language Access services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. School notices for parent meetings and workshops are translated into other languages for our non-English speaking parents. If needed, we offer translation to parents by other parents at our PTA meetings. Many of the ELL parents participate in several workshops/activities, such as It’s My Park Planting Day and PTA Arts & Crafts Night, because these are hands-on activities that do not require verbal instruction. We have had ELL parents volunteer to teach a craft from their native culture at the Arts & Crafts Night, such as Origami. We have also sponsored a Family Picnic night at our last PTA meeting of the school year, at which parents from the school bring in food from their family’s country of origin to share with other parents. These activities are not just for ELL parents to enjoy, but foster a sense of community between ELL parents and non-ELL parents by the inclusion of respect for each other’s cultures and customs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Molly Wang, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Fresh Meadow School School DBN: 26Q173 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Molly Wang Title Principal Denise Gilrane Assistant Principal Jean Mendler Parent Coordinator Joanne Wang ENL/Bilingual Teacher Stephen Chow Parent Rhea Newman Teacher/Subject Area Courtney Horan Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Aimee Winick School Counselor Danielle Giunta Yazmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Odalis DeJesus Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 09/19/17 09/19/17 9/19/17 09/19/17 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q School Name: 173Q Superintendent: D.Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using the Parent Home Language Survey form and data from ATS, we are able to identify the different languages spoken by families of students at our school. From the data we count the number of families who would need interpretation and translation services. In addition, the Parent Coordinator sends home a letter school wide to get a more accurate count of families througout the school who would need translation. Every piece of information that goes out to families are translated by our bilingual Chinese and Spanish teachers. Oral translation is also provided by bilingual teachers and some members of PTA at parent meetings.Collection of such data is done at least 10 days after enrollement and translation and interpretation services are put in place immediately to insure timely services 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Chinese, Spanish, Urdu, Korean,Farsi, Hebrew and Russian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PTA Year long Calendar of events -September Opening Day Principal and Parent Coordinator's welcome letter -Opening Day/September Grade level newsletter - End of month starting in September - May All DOE announcements such as school closing, parent/teachers Conference day - September-June Trips- October-June After school programs - Ocotber - June PTA and/or Principal's Parent workshops- October-June All memos informing parents of pertinent information regarding 2018-19 CEP 67  curriculum and assessment - September - June 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to school Night and Parent-Teachers Conferences (Sept, Nov, May and June) Tuesday's Parent Outreach/individual/small group meetings (September - June) Evening workshops on various topics throughout the year (September- June) Attendance teacher/social worker/counselor/Parent Coordinator make calls to parents throughout the year - Sept - June. PTA Calendars 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 68   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All signs in and around school are translated into the Chinese and Spanish. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Twice a year (November and April), Parent Cordinator and ENL teachers conduct parent survey on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 69 
