2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q174 School Name: P.S. 174 WILLIAM SIDNEY MOUNT Principal: KARIN KELLY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William Sidney Mount 28Q174 342800010174 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 65-10 Dieterle Crescent, Rego Park, NY 11374 718 897 7006 Phone Number: 718 897 7254 Fax: Karin Kelly Kkelly8@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Karin Kelly Rich Niccolich Elana White and Vanessa Bryant (Co-Presidents) Gina Mastrogiacomo N/A N/A none District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27Sutphin Boulevard, Jamaica, NY 11435 MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 557-2618 Phone Number: FSC: 519 718 557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  8201 Rockaway Boulevard, Queens NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 281-3509 Phone Number: 718 281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karin Kelly Richard Niccolich Elana White Denise Frango N/A N/A N/A N/A Wendy Bernstein Marie Russell Gina Mastrogiacomo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher/Chair 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Geraldo Maldonado Angelina Fernandez Jillian Coulton Rosa Vargas Jeanne Kullas Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Parent Alternate Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of Public School 174 is to create a community of learners through engaging, nurturing, and stimulating educational experiences. Through technology, STEM and arts integration we enhance student engagement, support instructional practices, and provide improved communication and presentations for all. 2018-19 CEP 9  By recognizing and embracing the diverse cultures represented in our school, students realize the importance of mutual respect and understanding. Civic responsibility is developed through service projects that reach out to others - building up both students and the community. Parent involvement is a vital part of the school. It complements and supports the professional teaching children receive. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Innovations We at PS 174 strongly believe that peer collaboration is a key component toward highly effective instructional. production reflection on this year’s accomplishments and planning for future progress. For us, authentic teacher development means across-the-grades teams will be using professional hours to evaluate student performance data and take collective responsibility for reaching our high standards. Innovative practices include – ● Inter-classroom teacher visits to share best teaching practices and grade-appropriate ideas. ● Peer-to-peer workshops for authentic teacher development in the use of classroom technology. ● Supporting each other with collaborative dialogue and hands on lesson sharing in core curriculum alignments. Our schedule include this collaboration weekly with plans for vertical team meetings, grade level articulation 3-5 times per week, as well as for grade leaders meetings with administration twice monthly. At Public School 174, we are dedicated to helping our students achieve academic gains. To help attain that end, we endeavor to make our school a warm and nurturing environment that fosters confidence, positive self-esteem, and social growth. Throughout the year, we provide praise, positive reinforcement and encouragement to motivate our students to do their best. We also provide opportunities for our students to collaborate on projects as well as engage in cooperative play with their peers. Throughout this process, we emphasize respect for everyone including oneself. The school establishes high expectations for all constituent groups, including students, teachers, and families, through a variety of communication practices. The administration consistently conveys important information to staff via the components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the use of professional learning teams. Impact There is mutual accountability for student success by all stakeholders. The high levels of professionalism, quality instruction, and effective communication around academic, social, and behavioral expectations for students result in improved student outcomes. PS 174 was named a New York State Reward School for three years with multiple teachers nominated as Big Apple Teachers. Four of those teachers have been Big Apple Finalists. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education students are 10% - one ICT class on each grade K, 1, 2, 4 and 5; two ICT classes on grade 4; one early childhood 12:1:1 Grade 1-2 class; one G&T class on each grade K-5; 10% of students are ENLs. Our ENL students need to receive supplemental instruction and their teachers additional professional learning that is matched to language acquisition. Our PPO visits indicate that our teacher pedagogy must be developed from the 2018-19 CEP 10  coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. This includes considering multiple modalities and multiple intelligences. We believe that developing discussion skills, student initiated questions, student led demonstrations and explanations, and all active learning experiences will provide both an enriching and engaging learning experience. Students who are English Language Learners need experiences with listening, speaking, reading and writing. Teachers of our ELL students need to be able to provide families with supplemental experiences as well as materials that cultivate and inspire our students. Students with disabilities need to have their environment as well as materials and methods of instruction and assessment modified in order to bring the information to them in an alternate manner. Giving students ways to show what they know by explaining, demonstrating and creating using artistic expressions such as projects, visuals and performing enhances the learning of all students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Critical Thinking * Collaboration * Communication * Community Making thinking visible by using feedback, questions and prompts Support thinking critically by explaining and citing evidence Based on feedback from PPO visits from District Administration; from School Walkthroughs and Observation Reports; from School Quality Guide; from staff feedback parent surveys, parent feedback forms. Goal 1 - 5A Framework for Great Schools- Element: Rigorous Instruction (ELA) By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% of students from grades K-5 increasing one performance level from Fall 2017 compared to Spring 2019 as measured by Teachers’ College ELA – Reading Levels. Goal 2 - 5B Framework for Great Schools – Element: Supportive Environment By June 2019, there will be an decrease of 3% of students from grades K-5 having disciplinary action from SY2018-2019 compared to SY 2018-2019 as measured by OORs (Online Occurrence Reports.) Goal 3 – 5C Framework for Great Schools- Element Collaborative Teachers (Math) By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% of students from grades K-5 increasing one performance level from Fall 2018 compared to Spring 2019 as measured by Math benchmark exams. Goal 4 – 5D Framework for Great Schools- Instructional Focus By June 2019, school leaders including teacher leaders, will create and implement a Professional Learning Plan that builds on teachers’ capacity in questioning and discussion techniques (Danielson component 3B) resulting in 60% of teachers increasing in one performance level as measured by the end of year MOTP (Measure of Teacher Practice.) Goal 5 – 5E Framework for Great Schools- Element: Strong Family and Community Ties By June 2019 there will engage parents in a more collaborative partnership as measured by a 5% increase in attendance at parent engagement and involvement activities based on PCAR (Parent Coordinator Activity Report) data. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q174 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 673 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 27 7 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 38.0% % Attendance Rate 33.3% % Reduced Lunch 11.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 25.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 32.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.44 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 66.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 69 68 27 94.9% 4.6% 8.9% 3.1% 34.6% 5.1% 2 0% 8.3 67.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Instructional Focus and Priorities Critical Thinking * Communicate * Collaborate * Contribute  Making thinking visible by using feedback, questions and prompts  Support thinking critically by explaining and citing evidence Based on feedback from PPO visits from District Administration; from School Walkthroughs and Observation Reports; from School Quality Guide; from staff feedback parent surveys, parent feedback forms. Citywide Instructional Expectations  Ensure that students are thinking critically and showing what they know through demonstrations, explanations and other project based learning experiences.  Ensure knowledge of students and their work, for teachers to use for cohesive planning as well as differentiation.  Develop a culture of collaboration of professional learning with cohesion, choice and purpose; restoring dignity and respect to the profession.  Design effective communication tools and events to increase parent engagement  Recognize the contribution of families and staff with specific areas of interest and expertise to share. From the Quality Review Well developed areas: The school establishes high expectations for all constituent groups, including students, teachers, and families, through a variety of communication practices. The administration consistently conveys important information to staff via the components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the use of professional learning teams. There is mutual accountability for student success by all stakeholders. The high levels of professionalism, quality instruction, and effective communication around academic, social, and behavioral expectations for students result in improved student outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 13  High Expectations: Findings - All curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. Higher-order thinking skills are consistently emphasized for all learners across most grades and content areas. Impact - As a result of these findings, the school attempts to ensure that the instructional shifts are woven throughout curriculum maps, units of studies and lesson plans addressing priority standards in core subject areas integrated with Science and Social Studies. In addition, rigorous and challenging academic tasks are incorporated into lessons where students have opportunities to demonstrate their thinking and understanding. 2.2 Assessment Findings - The school aligns assessments to the curricula, and uses ongoing common assessments and grading practices to analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Impact - As a result, across classrooms, students are presented with student friendly rubrics for each subject area and know the expectations of grade level appropriate work. In addition, curriculum teams have made ongoing adjustments to curriculum to address differences systematically within grades for both English language arts and mathematics using curricula materials. 4.2 Teacher Teams Findings - Teachers work effectively in collaborative teams within and across grades to share their practice, analyze data from common assessments, monitor student progress and make modifications to curriculum and are able to participate in school level decision-making. These structured collaborations result in shared leadership structures and the implementation of curricular adjustments aimed at improving student learning outcomes. Supporting Evidence  Teacher teams visiting classrooms to observe practice.  Teachers tracking data to identify skills that students have and have not yet mastered  Teams meet to analyze student skill levels and identify best practices for targeted challenge areas. Next steps  Making decisions for planning and materials based on their inquiry learning.  Although teachers are clearly evaluating the impact of curriculum on student learning through analysis of assessment data and student work products, they have not yet engaged in inquiry around pedagogical decision-making and how their practice informs outcomes for all learners. A review of the School Quality Guides indicates the following: Student Progress Section Our school saw an increase of 4 points from 66.0 to 70.0 for the Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for all grade 4 and 5 students. Our Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for the Lowest Third in for grades 4 and 5 also increased from 73.0 to 75.0 (2 point increase). In Mathematics, our school saw a significant increase of 12 points from 55.5 to 67.5 for the Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for all grade 4 and 5 students. Our Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for their Lowest Third in Math for grades 4 and 5 also significantly increased from 45.0 to 73.0 (28 point increase). 2018-19 CEP 14  For Early Grade Progress (Grade 3 Only), our school had an increase in from 2.42 to 2.72; an increase of 0.30. In Mathematics, the Early Grade Progress score went up significantly from last year. In 2012-13 our school scored 2.39 and this year received a score of 3.37 for an increase of 0.98. Student Achievement A review of the latest Quality Review and the New York State Education Department Assessments, together with data collected through walk-throughs, teacher reflections and self-assessments, and administrators observations, the following are priorities for improvement: 1- Deepen differentiation of instruction so that all lessons engage students and offer suitable challenge at their level, including effective questioning that elicits higher-order thinking and extends learning. 2- Develop and strengthen partnerships and community links to support students’ personal and academic growth by increasing access to project based learning for all students, both curricular and extra-curricular, such as: Young Debaters Club, Ballroom Dance Teams, Basketball Teams, Writing Club, and Technology Club. 3- Increase opportunities for students to take more ownership of their learning and to increase student engagement in learning with project based learning experiences in content areas such as writing, math, the arts and technology. 4-Increase the participation and contribution of our families - families sharing their expertise and special interests in the school and classroom. We are involving our families in the learning, not just watching or celebrating the learning as an audience. Teacher Effectiveness We have created a position of Model teacher, as well as the use of teacher visits to model best practices. The model teacher has strong background in differentiation of instruction for varied learners, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1 - 5A Framework for Great Schools- Element: Rigorous Instruction (ELA) By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% of students from grades K-5 increasing one performance level from Fall 2017 compared to Spring 2019 as measured by Teachers’ College ELA – Reading Levels. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators in short frequent cycles of classroom observation; provide feedback to teachers - from the rubric - including evidence and next steps. Teachers self-assess on selected components of the research-based rubric; examining the Framework for Teaching and reading of the text. Teachers reflect on their practice. (beginning, middle and end of the year.) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Sept 18 - June 19 Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Ongoing Teachers; Principal Teachers participate in professional learning communities, through collaboration, planning periods, classroom visits, online learning, and (but not limited to) lesson study groups. Teachers and Model Teacher Sept -June Teacher Leaders Administrators Admin. Intern Use of the Professional Learning time and Other Professional Duties as outlined in the United Federation of Teachers Contract 2014. Model teacher has programmed periods available to support teachers in their practice. Teachers Sept -June Teachers Teacher Leaders Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshop and information sessions; school website and weekly emails. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1- Use of Title III Immigrant and other Title III funds to provide the supplemental funding for our Model Teacher. 2018-19 CEP 16  2-Use of teacher teams, peers, Instructional Coaches and Lead Math Teachers for demonstration of modeling, developing instructional classroom norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum, development of assessments, and analysis of data for subjects and grades. 3- Use of and Advance for teacher evaluations/feedback impacting on student progress 4- Engaging in classroom visitations, out of school professional learning, teacher team meetings, and common prep periods to foster collaboration. Our schedule has been designed to increase the number of common planning periods, as well as the need for teacher leaders to be available to meet across grades on a monthly basis. 5- Use of the New York City Department of Education resources such as the Common Core Library , Department of English Language Learners and student support instructional resources recommended by the DOE Handbook for Professional Learning ; and professional texts, (Other Than Professional Services) for student consumables and materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid year benchmarks - Reading Just Right Book Levels - January Assessments (K-B; G1 H; G2 K; G3 M; G4 R; Gr 5 T) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Reading - TC Grade Level Reading Standards for Just Right Books Grade Level Writing Rubrics; beginning of the year BOY and EOY MoSL; monitored through monthly writing tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A review of the School Quality Snapshot by our School Leadership Team revealed that there is a need to improve communication, as well as Safety and Respect , between home and school. Although there has been an increase with our parents, we continue to strive for improvement. Need exists to increase parent and staff participation in the in order for our scores to be properly reflected of our true environment. We have been using social media platforms such as Remind.com and SignUp.com to assure full communications and updates between our home and school. We are relying on this to supplement the existing methods such as email, phone, and paper flyers. Parents want immediate updates and share of information when it concerns safety announcements. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 2 - 5B Framework for Great Schools – Element: Supportive Environment By June 2019, there will be an decrease of 3% of students from grades K-5 having disciplinary action from SY2018-2019 compared to SY 2018-2019 as measured by OORs (Online Occurrence Reports.) 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At Public School 174, we are dedicated to helping our students achieve academic gains. To help attain that goal, we endeavor to make our school a warm and nurturing environment that fosters confidence, positive self-esteem, and social growth. Parents Staff Students Sept 18-June 19 All Staff Students Families Throughout the year, we provide praise, positive reinforcement and encouragement to motivate our students to do their best. We also provide opportunities for our students to collaborate on projects as well as engage in cooperative play with their peers. In the process, we place emphasis on providing respect to everyone including oneself. Safety Meetings: School Safety meetings are held to address the data compiled on The committee is working toward identifying times of the day where incidents are likely to occur. The school has addressed the concerns of lunch time safety by adjusting the schedule of our school nurse to be always available during the lunch periods, increasing the number of school volunteers during lunch and lunch recess, and making program schedule adjustments for use of upper grade student monitors who assist with our primary grades. Special Assembly Programs : Grade assemblies for upper and lower grade students are conducted with presentations by our Assistant Principal and support team with our students. Teachers design and develop classroom projects on diversity, bullying, peer pressure and peer mediation. Our guidance and School Based Support Team ( providers design classroom presentations on these topics. New books are purchased for classroom teachers to be used in lessons as well as circulated from our school library. Presentations and workshops are planned for cyber-bullying and web resources have been distributed on these topics. We are continuing with our Community of Readers with books on the topics teaching positive social skills, character education, and anti-bullying. Parents Staff Students DOE School Nurse Sept -June Assistant Principal Principal Building Response Team (BRT) Sept -June Student Council Parent Association Principal Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor Psychologist Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  Community Service : Students Sept- June Youth and Development Liaison Asst. Principal Principal Student engagement increases by creating additional opportunities of students participating in community service projects and grade and class celebrations. Our parents continue to be invited to our school for meetings, workshops, and grade/school events. Together with our Parents Association and Student Council , our school enjoys several Spirit Days, combined with a school fundraiser for the arts. These are quite successful with students, staff and parents wearing school colors of blue and yellow, cheering for our wonderful school! This year, our Parent Coordinator and Parents Association have arranged the new communication system called Blackboard for telephone notification for our school. Using the system as a reminder, every student wore their colors, participated in the walk-a-thon, and even brought a small towel to school to sit on in the school yard. Staff Families Community Support Staff Volunteers Support Staff : Support staff (school aides) has additional training in controlling large groups of students. They are meeting monthly with administration, including our Youth and Development Support , to remind them of expectations for communication and direction of students, as well as in communicating with our volunteers. The school aides are provided with equipment for the students as well tools to use in directing the students. In review of the Learning Environment Survey , we know that students expect respect for everyone in the school. We will be including students in our meetings and with our PS 174 Suggestion Box in order to hear their voices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops; parent information sessions; parent volunteers; parent experts; parent presenters. Teachers and administrators are using social media apps to facilitate communication - specifically Twitter, Remind.com and SignUp.com sharing celebrations and accomplishes such as community activities, parent/child activities, enrichment experiences, school accomplishments and recognitions, et. al. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Recruitment of school volunteers; locating books on relevant topics for Community of Readers ; scheduling the year for weekly and monthly events in classrooms, by grade levels, in specialty areas, and school wide programs; scheduling performances and assembly programs and shows. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 20  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Evaluate partnerships with Arts agencies such as New Victory Theater, The Joyce Theater, Dancing Classrooms , Ballet Tech , NY City Parks; LEGO Learning, among others. Feedback will be taken regarding professional learning, classroom implication for instruction, and student outcomes. Feedback on all school workshops, residencies, and school celebrations will be evaluated and used to revise programs and opportunities for our children Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher, Parent and student surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Progress Section Our school saw an increase of 4 points from 66.0 to 70.0 for the Me es the following: Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for all grade 4 and 5 students. Our Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for the Lowest Third in for grades 4 and 5 also increased from 73.0 to 75.0 (2 point increase). In Mathematics, our school saw a significant increase of 12 points from 55.5 to 67.5 for the Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for all grade 4 and 5 students. Our Median Adjusted Growth Percentile for their Lowest Third in Math for grades 4 and 5 also significantly increased from 45.0 to 73.0 (28 point increase). For Early Grade Progress (Grade 3 Only), our school had an increase in from 2.42 to 2.72; an increase of 0.30. In Mathematics, the Early Grade Progress score went up significantly from last year. In 2012-13 our school scored 2.39 and this year received a score of 3.37 for an increase of 0.98. Student Achievement When looking at the student achievement section, of the School Quality Guide, 54.4% of students in grades 3-5 were proficient (scored between a 3.0 and 4.5); 5.5% higher than the prior year’s score. It is 26.4% higher than the city average of 28%. The school’s Average Proficiency rating in was 2.96. Last year the Average Proficiency rating was 2.94; with a slight increase of 0.02 from the previous year. In Mathematics, our school has an overall proficiency percentage of 61.8% for students in grades 3 through 5; 12.0% higher than last year’s score and 26.8% higher than the city average of 35%. The school’s Average Proficiency rating in Math was 3.31 and 3.01; a significant increase of 0.30. A review of the latest Quality Review and the New York State Education Department Assessments , together with data collected through walkthroughs, teacher reflections and self-assessments, and administrators observations, the following are priorities for improvement: 1- Deepen differentiation of instruction so that all lessons engage students and offer suitable challenge at their level, including effective questioning that elicits higher-order thinking and extends learning. 2- Develop and strengthen partnerships and community links to support students’ personal and academic growth by increasing access to project based learning for all students, both curricular and extra-curricular, such as: Young Debaters Club, Ballroom Dance Teams, Basketball Teams, Writing Club, and Technology Club.. 2018-19 CEP 22  3- Increase opportunities for all students to take more ownership of their learning and to increase student engagement in learning with project based learning experiences in content areas such as writing, math, the arts and technology. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 3 – 5C Framework for Great Schools- Element Collaborative Teachers By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% of students from grades K-5 increasing one performance level from Fall 2018 compared to Spring 2019 as measured by Math benchmark exams. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional learning around Common Core Learning Standards and tasks provided by administration, teacher leaders, and Queens South and District 28 Support Specialist that includes presentations by Instructional Specialists in SE - Special Education as well as and Content Areas. Teachers will develop a correlation between Units of Study and the incorporating opportunities for all students to conduct research and use supporting evidence, in Science and Social Studies, through the English Language Arts ; and to explain their tasks in math using word problems, numeric algorithms as well as visuals; using collaborative learning platform on google Drive. On grade level teams, teachers will design lessons infusing opportunities to read and respond to a combination of literary and information texts through writing expression. Teachers will work together developing lesson and unit plans that incorporate oral and written skills needed for providing evidence to support arguments and explain mathematical concepts utilizing - project based learning, arts integration and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept -June Professional Paraprofessionals Teachers Sept-June Teachers Sept-June Development Team – Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Teacher Leaders (ESL, Math, Literacy and SE.) Vertical and Horizontal Teacher Teams Teachers Sept -June Teachers in Teams How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops; Twitter account; ps174.org; parent newsletters; monthly goals; weekly emails; teachers use of REMIND app. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  Teachers and Administrators salaries; Per session hours for Inquiry Team members; per diem days for Professional learning; OTPS for instructional supplies and books. Include instructional resources and professional literature for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 50% of level 1 and 2 students will increase one level toward grade level skills math expectations as measured by the January math assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work samples compared to grade level rubrics and writing expectations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Instructional Expectations from the New York City Department of Education (DOE) include use of cycles of feedback to teachers through visits and observations. There are individual needs of our teaching staff – from novice through master teachers. Teachers have varied experiences, backgrounds, and education. Individual professional development plans for each teacher based on their next steps for progress and movement to the next level within the continuum. Teacher self-assessments looking at the selected components of the rubric are established through our Inquiry Team and Professional Learning plans. Teacher reflections are appropriate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4 – 5D Framework for Great Schools- Instructional Focus By June 2019, school leaders including teacher leaders, will create and implement a Professional Learning Plan that builds on teachers’ capacity in questioning and discussion techniques (Danielson component 3B) resulting in 60% of teachers increasing in one performance level as measured by the end of year MOTP (Measure of Teacher Practice.) 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in short frequent cycles of classroom observation; providing feedback to the rubric including evidence and next steps. Teachers Sept -June Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers self-assess on selected components of the research-based rubric; examining the Danielson Framework and reading of the text. Teachers participate in professional learning communities, through collaboration, planning periods, classroom visits, online learning, and (but not limited to) lesson study groups. Teachers Sept-June Teachers Teachers Sept-June Teachers Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Administrators Queens South Support Staff Principal and Assistant Principal Queens South Leadership and Support Staff Administrators will attend professional development such as (but not limited to) – Network Meetings, Summer Institutes, Principal and Assistant Principal study groups on topics such as Common Core Learning Standards, and providing effective feedback to teachers through the use of the Framework for Teaching. Administrators Sept-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS174.org; parent letters; weekly emails; PA meetings; Town Hall Safety meetings; Volunteer recruitment; parent workshops and information sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  DOE Talent Coach , Professional books such as, Handbook for Professional Learning , Engage NY web resources for Common Core Learning Standards ( units, Common Core Library . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Ongoing review of completion status on Advance . By February 2019, a minimum of 50% of all required observations and feedback reports will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance website Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the latest Quality Review , The School Quality and the latest New York State Assessments in all subject areas, together with data collected through walkthroughs, teacher reflections and self-assessments, and administrators observations, the following are priorities for improvement: 1- Deepen differentiation of instruction so that all lessons engage students and offer suitable challenge at their level, including effective questioning that elicits higher-order thinking and extends learning. 2- Develop and strengthen partnerships and community links to support students’ personal and academic growth by increasing access to project based learning for all students, both curricular and extra-curricular, such as: Young Debaters Club , Ballroom Dance Teams, Basketball Teams, Writing Club, Technology Club and celebrating the students learning via website, Twitter , and in person events. 3- Engage families in strategies of differentiating instruction, by including them in information sessions, classroom celebrations and demonstrations, and school events, in order for students to take more ownership of their learning and to increase parent engagement in learning. 4- Invite students and families to celebrate and participate in project based learning experiences in content areas such as writing, math, the arts and technology. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 5 – 5E Framework for Great Schools- Element: Strong Family and Community Ties By June 2019 there will engage parents in a more collaborative partnership as measured by a 5% increase in attendance at parent engagement and involvement activities based on PCAR (Parent Coordinator Activity Report) data. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implement the web-based software platforms (such as , Blackboard.com, and , in order to communicate more effectively with our parents. Staff and Parents Sept-June Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Email monthly goals in all subject areas and post on ps174.org Conduct workshops specialized for NY Account, the Assessments, Middle School Choice Process (among others) during varied times of the day/evening and use feedback forms. Translate major school correspondence into our dominant languages (Russian, Spanish, and Chinese) to meet the needs of our families. Use free translation services of the DOE, as well as paid use of oral interpreters when necessary for parent meetings, conferences, workshops, scoring, newsletters, and enrollment documents.) We use all of our funds available through both tax levy and Title III Grant. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff and Parents Sept -June Webmaster Parent Coordinator Principal Teachers Sept -June Principal Parent Coordinator Pupil Accounting Secretary Sept -June DOE Translation Services The Big Word Bilingual staff Parents per their requested language – oral and/or written Parents per their requested language – oral and/or written If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 30  PC Salary; Tax Levy; Parent Association; Parent involvement grants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in parent’s engagement by a review of attendance documents at events, responses to surveys and written feedback (surveys, blog response, emails) from PCAR (Parent Coordinator Activity Report) data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets; survey responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-3: Level 1 and 2 per teacher assessments and/or parent recommendations From NYSED –scale scores below the determination as follows: Grade 4 – Grade 3 SS Below 277 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson Groups Small group In school Headsprout Comprehension Fundations Simple Solutions – grammar automaticity and fluency One-to-one In school Small group In school Small group In school and home One-to-one In school and home One-to-one In school and home A to Z Reading Small group In school Grade 5 – Grade 4 SS Below 289 Raz Kids and Leveled reading books Guided Reading Math Steps Small group In school and home Go Math! Think Central Small group and individual Simple Solutions Math (Summer and supplemental) Ten Marks Math – builds procedural fluency Whole class, small group and individual Individual Individual In school and home In school and home In school and home In school and home K-3: Level 1 and 2 per teacher assessments and/or parent recommendations. From NYSED – Math scale scores below the determination as follows: Grade 4 – Grade 3 Math SS Below 265 Grade 5 – Grade 4 Math SS Below 288 Reflex Math – automaticity of facts 2018-19 CEP 32  Science Grade 5 Students scoring levels 1 and 2 on the NYS Grade 4 Science Assessment Non-f ion content within instruction All methods of delivery In school and home STEM enrichment classes – technology, math and science integrated cluster teachers. Whole class Grade/Interest projects Individual choices Small Group All methods of delivery Whole class Grade/Interest projects Individual choices Small Group All methods of delivery Small group setting Whole class Individual In school and home In school and home afterschool before school AIS Social Studies From NYSED – scale scores below the determination as follows: Grade 4 – Grade 3 SS Below 299 Non-f ion content within instruction Social Studies and Arts enrichment classes with cluster teachers and residency programs. Grade 5 – Grade 4 SS Below 296 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher assessments and/or parent recommendations. Speech –Articulation, targeting phonemes, all positions of words at the word levels, phrase level and sentence level. Receptive Language Difficulties – following directions, understand early presented material. Guidance - Social, emotional and/or behavioral issues. Request from staff and/or parents. Sensory interventions – strategies for classroom adaptations such as Hokki Stools, sensory balls, chew toys, grippers, vests, socks, trampolines, bean 2018-19 CEP 33  bag chairs, twister seats, among others. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. not applicable not applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35 School supplies; uniforms; books. Anticipate use of funds for SY 2016-2017 include computer softward subscriptions. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4,157 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 174 William Sidney Mount , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Public School 174 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing oviding parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 174 William Sidney Mount, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Professional Development From our plan 2017-2018, we used a portion to fund a Model teacher, assuring that our teachers are receiving the highest level of planned and programmed professional development that is job embedded. As this arrangement was quite successful, we plan for this practice to continue for the 2018-2019 school year. Our model teacher has been vetted by the Department of Education and has been accepted by the Teacher Leadership Pathways, with the following belief: The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) and United Federation of Teachers (UFT) hold a common belief that by extending educators’ skills beyond their individual classroom, teachers can be powerful levers of change for school communities. Students deserve the best instruction from the most qualified and training teachers. Model teachers can provide job embedded professional developing, working directly with classroom teachers in order to meet diverse student needs. Model Teachers have been vetted by the Department of Education and are highly qualified to serve in the role within a school. Teachers to receive training - Classroom teachers whose students are ENL as well as from immigrant families. We have 3 certified ESL teachers who will work side by side with our Model Teacher (Gina Mastrogiacomo.) Mrs. Mastrogiacomo will imbed professional development through her program, as well as the additional hours that the position requires. The Model Teacher is available for classroom visits both during preparation periods (5 per week), professional periods (weekly), as well as Teacher Lead periods (2 additional per week.) Model Teacher is on our School Leadership Team and is a vital part of our instructional cabinet. We have 30 classroom teachers (K-5) as well as 6 certified special education teachers who will benefit. Professional learning takes place during the 80 minutes of Professional Development and 30 minutes of other professional duties per the collective bargaining agreement of the UFT. A teacher leader will support colleagues with the teaching and learning in core subject areas for immigrant students. The teacher leader will utilize a lab classroom to demonstrate methods for implementing instructional strategies that ensure that academic instruction in English is meaningful and comprehensible. Further, the teacher leader will demonstrate how to implement strategies that simultaneously integrate language acquisition, language development, and academic achievement. Teachers and the teacher leader will work collaboratively to produce a “strategies toolkit” which includes a plethora of ways to enhance or improve instruction of immigrant students based on assessment results. Existing/approved plan - Public School 174 is located in the Rego Park section of Queens, New York. This pre-kindergarten to fifth grade school serves a population of students from culturally diverse backgrounds. The community is home to new immigrants from Asia, Latin America and the 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Middle East. Our ESL-English as a Second Language program is freestanding serving 73 of the 680 total students in both General and Special Education. In order to address the low academic achievement of our ELL students, to increase parental involvement, and to provide access to our many bilingual materials, we serve these students in several ways. According to the PS174 Comprehensive Educational Plan, a concerted effort and specific plan to address the needs of our ELL students will be implemented. Analyzing data from our Most up to date ELA and Math test results, in-class assessments, and reading level statistics, it is clear that our continuing ELLs (beginner, intermediate and advanced,) as well as newcomers, in the testing grades three, four and five, could benefit greatly from supplementary instruction in both Math and ELA. These students will be served by a certified ESL teacher during before and/or after school. Each session will last for up to 2 hours and focus on test preparation strategies for ELLs. Scaffolding and differentiation of instruction will be emphasized. The language of instruction is English. The program runs from December through the remainder of the school year, and continues for up to 12. For the 2018-2019 school year, our school will set aside funds to provide supplemental instruction for our ELL students, provide additional support to parents of our ELL students, and to provide professional learning to our classroom teachers as a school-based mentor teacher. We also serve our ELLs using the Imagine Learning software, a proven research-based computer program for ELLs that we use to provide service in a supplementary manner. We have 24 licenses for this program, servicing the majority of our ELLs in grades two through five. ESL teachers utilize this program during push-in, pull-out, and co-teaching periods to provide supplemental language support. ELL students will also be receiving additional 45-minute support before school in the computer lab, Monday through Friday. ESL teachers as well as GE teachers utilize student-friendly interactive language websites (usingenglish.com, a4esl, englishforeveryone, perfectenglish.com, etc) to further improve ELL students' listening, speaking, and reading skills. Another way we serve our students is: Our library and classrooms contain close to two hundred books in Russian, Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Polish, Indonesian and several other languages. Additionally, we have many books representing the people of various cultures. These books are available to our students in the school library, classrooms and ESL classrooms. Our school library is open for After-School Tuesdays every week between 2:00 PM to 3:30 PM. During this time, parents and students visit the library together to read and select books. They also have access to computer technology and programs at that time. The library is open to all students in grades pre-kindergarten through fifth together with their parents. After-school Tuesday staff includes a certified ESL teacher and a content area teacher. Our ESL teacher instructs students in the lower grades by doing read-alouds. Both the ESL teacher and the other teacher assist ELL students and parents in finding appropriate literature, including bilingual and native language books. In addition, both pedagogues assist parents by helping them sign up for NYC Schools Account . They teach parents how to navigate this system in order to obtain vital information regarding their children. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: Used of model teacher A need exists for us to address the academic deficiencies of our ELL students and to support their learning by developing the teachers in best instructional practices for ELLs. Our CEP provides for intensive professional development for teachers in specialized strategies to meet the needs of ELLs at different levels of English language acquisition, as well as addressing the specific needs of individual teachers. This is accomplished by including a teacher as Model teacher. The teacher has been vetted from the Department of Education for this role as supplemental support for our staff. Professional development is coordinated by the PS 174 Professional Development Team, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Teacher Specialists (including ESL teachers), and Grade Leaders, as well as our Model Teacher. The team works together to combine ideas on effective planning for teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ needs for professional development. Professional development will be delivered after school on Mondays, once per month, between the hours of 2:20 to 3:40 PM. In many of our grades (except kindergarten where the class is taught by a certified ESL teacher), ELLs are exclusively or mostly in one class. The ESL PD will be given to all of those teachers and who have ELLs in their class and to their paraprofessionals as well. Training will take place in the school library and will be provided by Mr. Romano and Mrs. Lobanova, our ESL Teachers, as well as our school administrators. In order to ensure the receipt of 7.5 hours of professional development, in the strategies for teaching ELLs, for general education staff and 10 hours for special education teachers and special education paraprofessionals, as per Jose P, some of our sessions will be attended by all staff and paraprofessionals, new teachers as well as experienced staff members. Our ESL teachers attend Professional Development workshops tailored to ELL instructional strategies offered by the Office of English Language Learners. Our ESL Liason attends monthly meetings with BFS - Queens South ESL specialists. ESL teachers turnkey strategies during professional development workshops and common planning periods. Common planning periods are included in the choices for a Professional Development Option with support from the ESL teachers as well as the BFS administrators. The topics for future professional development workshops include aligning curriculum for ESL students to the Common Core Learning standards, conducting reading assessments for ELLs, scaffolding instruction and differentiation of instruction for ELLs. These last two topics will prepare our staff to assist our ELLs as they progress from the elementary to the middle school grades. In addition, Mr. Romano and/or Mrs. Lobanova will turnkey recent strategies that he learns throughout the year in BFS professional development sessions, instructional strategy sessions offered by the Office of English Language Learners, and from our Learning through an Expanded Arts Program sessions. Anticipated topics that BFS and school staff will cover in their future meetings are: making thinking maps, a series of lessons on expository writing, and lessons on NYSESLAT testing strategies. Mr. Romano and/or Mrs. Lobanova will turnkey these lessons and stratagies. In our comprehensive professional development program, we strive to maximize the talents of teachers who have Title III served students in their classes. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Activities Rationale A teacher leader will work with colleagues to develop parental engagement activities that will provide opportunities for parents to learn more about important topics. Examples of these include specific strategies immigrant parents can use at home to support what is being done in the classroom, ways immigrant parents can use school websites to check their student’s progress, and introducing immigrant parents to applications that students can use at home to enhance learning. Further, the teacher leader will work with teachers to develop relationships with immigrant parents by supporting teachers in their efforts to invite immigrant parents to visit their child’s classroom, encourage immigrant parents to volunteer in the school, and plan ways to bring families (immigrant and non-immigrant) together through grade performances, family culture celebrations, and student classroom activities. Parent Engagement Activities planned throughout the year during planning sessions, School Leadership Meetings, as well as grade and teacher meetings. These events will take place during every Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays, throughout the year per the UFT collective bargaining agreement (40-70 minutes weekly; plus the four scheduled parent/teacher conferences (2 additional afternoon and 3 additional evening hours.) Topics include but are not limited to: Library Tuesdays, weekly open access for families to visit our school library and circulate books; they also have access to six computers with two teachers who are programmed to assist with parent/child activities during this time; STEM learning - parent/child science content area project based learning activities; parent/child art activities; Parent child book clubs; parent workshops on topics of language; after school and Saturday Field Trips with support from the CASA - Cultural Afterschool Adventures (past activities include Queens Botanical Gardens and NY Hall of Science. ) We will have meeting and professional development session exclusively on translations and interpretation services. Interpretation will be provided by in house staff members, supplemented by the Interpretation Services of the Department of Education, including free over the phone as well as paid Per Diem Interpreters. Documents can be translated by in house staff as well as paid and free services from the Department of Education. Provider - Model Teacher - Gina Mastrogiacomo; ESL Teacher Phil Romano; Parent Coordinator Laura Hui. Parents are notified of these class, grade and schoolwide projects and programs through multiple means such as school website; paper flyers; email distribution list; social media platforms such as Signup.com and Remind.com.Our parent coordinator and ESL teachers are actively involved in maintaining and improving communication with parents of ELLs and engaging them in school activities. Parents of ELLs are targeted in order to facilitate higher achievement for ELLs. These activities are in addition to mandated orientations for the parents of ELLs. Translation and interpretation assistance is made available during parent events. We have over 20 paraprofessionals in our school and most of them are bilingual. If a translation is needed or 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities an interpreter would be helpful, we call the main office and they ask the paraprofessionals to assist, if available. Otherwise, our staff makes use of the over the phone interpretation service provided by the Department of Education and the use of free Translations for general school documents. Activities for parents of ELLs are held each month throughout the school year. Parents of ELLs have already attended academic workshops. From early to mid-September, curriculum workshops were held for each grade. On Thursday, October 2, 2017 a workshop was held on middle school choice. Three workshops have been held in October on NYC Schools Accounts and the NYS test scores. Electronic copies of the workshop presentations and/or documents are available (with Google Translate capability) on our ps174.org website. Future workshops are planned on various topics including information on NYS assessments, the Common Core Learning Standards, strategies parents can use to help their children with homework, ways to increase their children's English abilities away from school, and information on reading Just Right books In addition, classroom teachers and ESL teachers have been meeting with parents of ELLs during parent engagement time on Tuesdays between 2:30 and 3:45 PM. Strategies are offered to enhance the child's learning of English and the child's progress is discussed at these meetings. Interpretation will be provided by in house staff members, supplemented by the Interpretation Services of the Department of Education, including free over the phone as well as paid Per Diem Interpreters. Documents can be translated by in house staff as well as paid and free services from the Department of Education. Non-academic crafting and culinary workshops are also offered in order to create a welcoming environment for parents to become more involved in their child’s school, as well as, to expose them to activities that can be done with their child at home. Our first crafting workshop, a fall papercrafts class, will be held in early December. In addition, many parents of ELLs attend our monthly parent book club meeting. Parent workshops are conducted by our ESL teachers, Natalia Lobanova and Phil Romano, as well as our Parent Coordinator, Laura Hui, and our lead teachers for each grade. Interpretation will be provided by in house staff members, supplemented by the Interpretation Services of the Department of Education, including free over the phone as well as paid Per Diem Interpreters. Documents can be translated by in house staff as well as paid and free services from the Department of Education. Workshops for parents of ELLs are listed on our monthly calendars which are sent home with each student. Additional copies are available in the school lobby. Our Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Hui, sends out a " save the date " email, about one month before each workshop. Then, one to two weeks before the workshop, a flyer is sent home with each student, reminding the parents about the upcoming event. Lingualinx is used to provide translated versions of these materials and parents receive notices in their language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Karin Kelly Borough Queens School Number 174 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karin Kelly Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natalia Lobanova Teacher/Subject Area Gina Mastrogiacomo Teacher/Subject Area Karen Roopchand Related-Service Provider Lori Berg Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Kerstin Kobetitsch Coach None School Counselor Vacancy Parent Elana White Parent Coordinator Laura Hui Field Support Center Staff Member Eric Touzalin Other (Name and Title) Philip Romano ESL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 99 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.18%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? There's an ongoing assessment for ELLs in all four constructs: reading, writing, listening and speaking. P.S. 174 takes a continuous, data-driven approach to improving student performance, using item analysis, portfolio assessment, and other indicators to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Early literacy skills of our ELLs continue to be assessed using the Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Workshop assessment tools. ENL and classroom teachers plan together to address students needs based on RLAT This year, we are also using the Measures of Student Learning, NYC Performance Assessments for students in all grades, kindergarten through fifth grade. We begin the year by administering the Pre-assessment in math to students in grade 3 and the pre-assessment in ELA to students in grades 3 through 5. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Interval collection of assessments. Reading Levels are tracked from June, September, November, January March and again in June to note Performance Level. i-Ready levels are tracked Beginning, Middle and End of the year; MOSL (performance task writing) Beginning and End of year. Math assessments are tracked with pre and post chapter assessments, using Go Math. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by ongoing examination of classroom work, informal assessments, formal assessments, ATS generated reports and CalcSoda. We utilize the AMAO tool to determine if our ELLs have made annual yearly progress. We study all indicators over time to analyze progress and trends for each individual student and across grades and ESL levels. NYSESLAT results are the final indicator of the level of success our programs have achieved. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Tiered interventions as Responose to Intervention (Tier III) use of research based programs (Imagine Learning; Wilson Reading, Fundations Phonics, Moby Max, et al) and at-risk services such as SETSS and guidance. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELL students identified by their teachers as unable to attain grade level performance benchmarks are considered for a series of progressive academic supplemental supports. The initial procedure after identification is a consultation with all the child's pedagoges, including ESL teachers, to compare observations and assess the student's strengths and weaknesses. Careful consideration is given to the amount of time the child has been in an English language environment, as many areas of difficulty for Learning Disabled children are similarly areas of difficulty for ELLs. As a rule, our initial process is one of identifying and instructionally targeting specific academic or behavioral deficiencies rather than attempting to identify a preconceived disability diagnosis. As part of our response to a child in apparent academic need is a strategically paced repertoire of intervention and assessment. Each intervention occurs over a scheduled period of time and is followed by assessment. A positive assessment may result in continuation of the intervention or even discontinuing if it is no longer considered necessary, though a follow-up targeted assessment would be scheduled. Should the assessment indicate continuing difficulties, intervention would be modified, continued or supplemented. All meetings, discussions, interventions and assessments are carefully documented and shared among all of the students relevant instructors. Parents are kept apprised of the intervention and their child's progress, and parents are mined for their insights into their offspring's interests and learning styles. All teachers have access to the RTI workbook, and interventions are based on on this multi-tiered approach. Assessments of ELL students are both formal and informal, with the goal of coaxing out the direct cause of the academic deficit. Limited comprehension skills due to limited vocabulary (a typical trait of ELLs, even those with considerable conversational skills) could easily be misidentified as a learning issue and not the instructional issue that it in fact is. Our team approach seeks to ensure that all areas of academic difficulty are carefully explored and varied instructional approaches are tested before moving on to a higher level intervention plan. LL students identified by their teachers as unable to attain grade level performance benchmarks are considered for a series of progressive academic supplemental supports. The initial procedure after identification is a consultation with all the child's pedagoges, including ESL teachers, to compare observations and assess the student's strengths and weaknesses. Careful consideration is given to the amount of time the child has been in an English language environment, as many areas of difficulty for Learning Disabled children are similarly areas of difficulty for ELLs. As a rule, our initial process is one of identifiying and instructionally targeting specific academic or behavioral deficiencies rather than attempting to identify a preconcieved disability diagnosis. As part of our response to a child in apparent academic need is a strategically paced repertoire of intervention and assessment. Each intervention occurs over a scheduled period of time and is followed by assessment. A positive assessment may result in continuation of the intervention or even discontinuing if it is no longer considered necessary, though a follow-up targeted assessment would be scheduled. Should the assessment indicate continuing difficulties, intervention would be modified, continued or supplemented. All meetings, discussions, interventions and assessments are carefully documented and shared among all of the students relevant instructors. Parents are kept apprised of the intervention and their child's progress, and parents are mined for their insights into their offspring's interests and learning styles. All teachers have access to the RTI 2018-19 CEP 55  workbook, and interventions are based on on this multi-tiered approach. Assessments of ELL students are both formal and informal, with the goal of coaxing out the direct cause of the academic deficit. Limited comprehension skills due to limited vocabulary (a typical trait of ELLs, even those with considerable conversational skills) could easily be misidentified as a learning issue and not the instructional issue that it in fact is. Our team approach seeks to ensure that all areas of academic difficulty are carefully explored and varied instructional approaches are tested before moving on to a higher level intervention plan. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLATand/or NYSITELL results for P.S. 174 have been reviewed in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. On the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT, 59 ELLs were tested and 10 of them achieved English proficiency. Of the children who did not achieve proficiency, 27 scored on the Expanding proficiency level; 11 students are on the Transitioning proficiency level, and 11 students on the Entering and Emerging proficiency level. (this needs to be updated with current data.) The analysis of the sub-test scores indicates that more focus needs to be given to the speaking and writing modalities, which will be considered in our planning for the year: students reaching proficiency continue to receive language support for another two years. Teachers ensure that the students use a cueing system, and they become proficient in predicting unfamiliar words. These students are taught to be able to monitor and self-correct when reading becomes unclear. Additionally, the students are taught to be mentally engaged with text. They acquire skills to analyze word structure and meaning, make educated guesses, and become active participants in discussions, problem-solving skills, and analysis. They will gradually reach the proficiency level of the general education students. Reading intervention is provided in each reading component: phonemic awareness, letter recognition, et. al using ELL methodology and strategies. Both whole class instruction and one-to-one intervention is provided to eliminate obstacles that ELL students face. In order to address difficulties in writing, student's prior knowledge is identified and activated during small group instruction. The explicit word teaching and cuing system is provided to ensure ELL students understand and use the correct English language structure and vocabulary. Explicit defining of content vocabulary is conducted with the use of translations and glossaries/dictionaries if and when appropriate. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Ongoing assessments, including conference notes, peer feedback, observed use of classroom scaffolds and supports, and technology data collection reports. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The program offered in our school is a Freestanding English that provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. English is a common language among the students. 2018-19 CEP 56  a) Stand-alone ENL instruction which implements instruction to develop English language skills though content area subjects so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is provided by the two fully certified ESL teachers. b) Integrated ENL instruction that builds English language skills through content area instruction is delivered by a dually certified Kindergarten teacher. c) Integrated ENL instruction that builds English language skills trough movement and physical education activities is provided by a certified PE and ESL teacher. In our school we use push-in model when the ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. They use a common preparation time and professional learning periods to plan and coordinate. Additionally, use pull-out model where students at the same grade and proficiency level receive targeted as well as supplemental instruction. ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. The ENL teachers work as a team with the general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. ELL students are in graded groups with mixed proficiency. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status receive a minimum number (4) of units of integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. NA/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There are five proficiency level of ENL students for which our school is planning according to the Units of Study Requirements: a) Our Entering (Beginning) level students receive 2 units (360 minutes) per week, which includes 1 unit (180 minutes) in stand-alone model and 1 unit (180 minutes) in integrated model; b) Emerging (Low intermediate) level ELL's receive 2 unites of study per week (360 minute): 0.5 units of study (90 minutes) in sdtand-alone model and 1 unit (180 min) in integrated model; c) Transitioning (Intermediate) level ELLs receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes): 0.5 unit of study (90 min) in integrated model and 0.5 unit of study (90 min) in stand alone model /ELA; d) Expanding (Advanced) level ELLs receive 1 unit of study (180 min) per week in ENL/ELA/Content A rea e) Commanding (proficient) level ELLs/Former ELls continue to receive ).5 units of study (90 min) per week in Integrated model?Content Area for an additional 2 years. In our school one period corresponds to 45 minutes, therefore students scoring at Enetring and Emerging levels are provided with 8 periods a week, and Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 4 periods of ENL a week. Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are grouped in grade cohorts with mixed proficiency and serviced by two ESL teachers. During push-in instruction teachers work with their assigned students during content instruction to provide language acquisition and academic vocabulary support. The instruction is provided in collaboration with general education classroom teachers. 2018-19 CEP 57  Students within our pull-out program are taught using English using ENL methodologies. ENL teachers work in collaboration with the main stream teachers providing instruction through the content area in connections with topics taught in the mainstream. ENL strategies include but not limited to genre and author studies, CCLS- based aims and lesson planning, and thematic reading instruction. To ensure students' academic and content area language development, students' prior knowledge is identified and activated during small group instruction by relating their prior knowledge to academic learning in a new language and culture and developing language awareness and critical literacy. Students are actively involved in hand-on activities connected to their everyday lives. Instruction is delivered to all ELLs using explicit and differentiated (Sheltered English) ENL strategies. All students receive scaffolded instruction in English in support of their classroom curriculum. Instructional approaches and methods used include: cooperative learning , oral presentations, role playing, and language experience activities; writing of reports, poetry, narrative accounts and procedures and responses to literature; use of graphic organizers; choral and individual reading of fictional and non-fictional works; and building of phonetic and phonemic awareness. Instruction is designed for students to compare content across multiple pieces of literature in both fiction and non-fiction with an increasing focus on non-fiction. This strategy aligns with the Common Core Learning Standards and helps prepare students for college and career readiness. We are a Teacher’s College focus school and we also utilize their strategies. These include reading mini-lessons, read-aloud, shared reading and word work. In the content areas, language instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development. These include CALLA methodologies, picture support, vocabulary pre-teaching, scaffolding and the use of sheltered English. To teach content areas in the grade K through 2 pull-out program, we use the Rigby Animals Theme Packs for ELLs which focuses on science and social studies lessons. We also use the Hampton Brown Avenues program in these grades. This program contains lessons in math, science, and social studies. In grades three through five, pull-out classes the instruction utilizes media, audio, visial and thematic materials designed to foster language acquisition in content area. Smartboard, IPads and other technolgy is used to accommodate all ELL students' learning needs. ESL teacher uses multiple resourses available both in hard copies/printed materials resources from the Internet: All of these programs contain lessons in social studies, science, and math. For our push-in periods: In grade 5, we use the text Social Studies, New York City - The United States, Canada and Latin America published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010. In grade 4, we use Simple Solutions by Nancy McGraw and Nancy Tordy published by Bright Ideas Press, LLC., Cleveland, Ohio and Science, NYC 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Once identified by NYSITELL exam and HLIS forms, new Spanish-speaking ELLs are given the Spanish LAB by native Spanish speaking ESL personnel (Ms. Morgenstern, teacher) in order to appropriately assess their native language skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students' performance data of multiple assessments is used to meet the needs of ELLs who are newcomers, long term ELLs and ELLs with special needs to ensure their smooth transition into a monolingual English environment. Our school does not have SIFE students. But if such student enrolls in our school, we will have a rigorously tailored program designed to boost this student's learning by implementing ENL instruction that utilizes the student’s cultural and academic backgrounds. The student's knowledge will be assessed using teacher-created leveled testing kits and appropriate 2018-19 CEP 58  intervention will be planned and implemented in both push-in and pull-out models. The ENL teacher will work collaboratevely with the classroom teacher. Using Sheltered English approach, visuals and technology, the ENL teacher will introduce the student to the topics currently taught the mainstream. During Parent Engagement conferences, the ENL teacher will be advise parents of the skills and techniques that will help their child catch up to English speaking peers. For the newcomer we created a budding system. Each student is teamed with a higher proficiency level peer. This buddy system creates a teaching/learning atmosphere from which every individual student can benefit and learn. The ENL teacher facilitates and provides assistance as needed. The newcomer is introduced to interactive learning websites and leveled books library. The student learns to use graphic organizers to help him organize his thoughts, write complete and meaningful sentences, and improve overall sentence structure. In the speaking modality, students learn to be more explicit in retelling a story with the teacher's guidance. The student is taught to use more descriptive words such as adverbs and adjectives, content area vocaulary and correct verb tenses. We provide prompts to make inferences from pictures by building student's prior knowledge, making personal connections, adding relevant details, and to organize writing in paragraphs. Students with special needs will receive all related services as per their IEP by a cooperatively working team of teachers. Scaffolding, word recognition, decoding and vocabulary development designed for each student spiral up to the next level that includes more complex skills. A special rubric exists to measure the student's progress in every modality. For Long Term Ell students we implement shared reading, read aloud, and think aloud strategies. We reinforce sequencing of events from a story skill and "story elements" skills. We use higher order level thinking tasks/prompt to encourage answer ing contextual questions and build on reading comprehension. A shared writing strategy is used to model paragraph structure and writing. Grammar conventions of writing, verb tenses, subject/verb agreement and punctuation skills are reinforced though the established routines. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 1. For ELL-SWDs, we use Math manipulatives, Go Math "Reteach" pages, Raz-Kids educational program. Our strategies are (but not limited to): small group instruction, color-coding, using charts with with computation steps, charts with word problems key words, scaffolded intruction, faded teacher prompts, leveled passages/tests, graphic organizers, task analysis - breaking down instruction into smaller, more manageable pieces, supplemental materials, such as place value charts, multiplication table, et al. 2. The use of realia and hands-on activities makes the acquisition and use of academic vocabulary easier, and provides the opportunity for real usage of specific technical language. This assure development of permanent, readily retrievable knowledge. Thematic units of study are utilized to provide extended opportunities for students to absorb essential concepts and subject specific vocabulary. If an ongoing assessment indicates that a student might be at risk, the school then takes steps to determine if thechild has a disability and requires special education services. We start the process with an initial referral. Once the school obtains parent consent, the child will be evaluated to determine his or her development and behavior, what he or she knows and how he or she learns, and his or her skills, abilities and areas of need. In most circumstances, the time frame for completing all necessary assessments and convening an Individualized Education Program (IEP) Team meeting is 60 calendar days from the receipt of the consent to initially evaluate your child. Once the child’s evaluation is completed, the parent will attend a meeting to discuss the child’s eligibility for special education services and, as needed, develop an Individualized Education Program (IEP) for him or her. Other attendees at this meeting include teachers and other professionals who know the child or have participated in the evaluations, or will likely be providing services to this child. The team makes a decision about the best setting for this child. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with special needs receive services as per their IEP's. ELL teachers are provided full access to their students IEP's, and are a part of all relevant IEP meetings. Students with special needs are mainstreamed as part of our pull-out and push-in programs. They are placed appropriately according to their IEP goals and grade levels. They are included in Title III, Wilson and AIS programs. This group of students receives services to support their learning disabilities and language acquisition needs. SBST team works collaboratively with ELL teachers. The educational differentiation plan for this group of students is similar to the plan for ELL students. 2018-19 CEP 59  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services for students with learning disabilities in our school are as follows: initial RTI for the students at risk, integrated co-teaching, SETSS, counseling, speech, OT, PT and vision services. Supplemental materials that enhance meaning, clarify confusing concepts and enable students to bridge their prior experiences with new learning are incorporated into lessons. Using differing learning styles and multiple intelligences approach in teaching considers all of our students needs. There are targeted intervention programs in the content area for all ELLs. In 1st grade, an ELL teacher pushes in during math enrichment and in 4th grade, an ELL teacher pushes in during science. There are also push-ins during reading workshop for different grades. During our AIS periods, a certified ELL teacher pushes in during content area studies. We will arrange for a visit from the The Museum of Natural History's Moveable Museum. Students that participate are all our fourth graders and our second and third grade ELLs. ELL and classroom teachers provide small group instruction with flexible skill-based groupings in the areas of science, math and social studies for all ELLs. Our Imagine Learning computer software uses many grade-appropriate, highly scaffolded science and social studies content area passages in its reading and writing instruction. Targeted interventions using the native language are also offered in the content areas. Some of our students work with bilingual paraprofessionals in lieu of a bilingual class as per their IEPs. These paras help other ELLs in the class who speak the same language as the student with the IEP, particularly during content area instruction where subject-specific terminology may be difficult for our ELLs to comprehend. In addition, ELLs in grades 3 through 5 are provided with bilingual glossaries, downloaded from the BETAC website, for math, science, and social studies. Students are also provided with bilingual dictionaries and The New Oxford Picture Dictionary (bilingual.) The bilingual picture dictionaries, in particular, provide support in the content areas of science, social studies and geography. In addition, our ELL classrooms and the school library contain many bilingual books in social studies and historical fiction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering purchasing new computer software licenses to update our Imagine Learning program. This year, in order to support our large influx of newcomers and to maintain better student-teacher ratios, we are grouping our students homogeneously for the most part, according to level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We discontinued our Jump Start program. In accordance with the new requirements, we consider Imagine Learning program to be the most effective for ELL general population, as well as for the students with special needs. It provides strong academic support through content area, accomodates language acquisitions, and since it is data driven, provides adequate monitoring and assessment tools of the students' progress and weaknesses. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs by sending home informational flyers in the native language as well as in English. Bilingual support services are provided to ELLs in our school. We have bilingual support from school personnel in the following languages: Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Indonesian and French. In addition, our school utilizes certified translation services for parent/teacher conferences on an as-needed basis. After-school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in our school include enrichment programs, test preparation classes, extended day, AIS and Library Tuesdays. Translation services are utilized as necessary to ensure that parents are aware of all optional services and programs, and our Parent Coordinator utilizes her network of multilingual parent volunteers to get the word out. The large number of limited English and non-English families attending our special grant-funded Saturday Botanical Gardens and Lego programs is a testament to the success of our outreach. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 60  For the instructional purposes we utilizes media, audio, visual and thematic materials. Technology such as Smartboard, IPads and tablets are used to accommodate all ELL students' learning needs. ELL teachers use multiple resources available both in hard copy/printed materials as well as electronic content access through the Internet. Some examples include: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The only program model we have been able to provide in our school has been the ENL program due to having fewer than 15 same language students in contiguous grades who want a bilingual program. As stated above, as part of the ENL program we provide our students with bilingual content area glossaries in math, science and social studies, as well as bilingual dictionaries and bilingual picture dictionaries. Students, particularly newcomers in the mid to upper grades, are encouraged to read and write in their native language. As previously described, many bilingual and native language books are available for their use in classrooms, the school library and the ENL classroom. Newcomers, where possible, are grouped with other same language speakers in the classroom to provide opportunity for accountable talk and increasing comprehensible input. Extended day computer programs provide native language support. Our Title III funded "Library Tuesday" program opens the school library to families at 3 PM to browse, read, research, and check out books including those from our extensive collection of bi-lingual and native language texts. This selection goes across the grade levels, from read-alouds to content area non-fiction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Leveled libraries are utilized. Technological programs are available in every grade K through 5, where content must be mastered before moving on to the next level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are not a shared space. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are no activities in our school to assist newly enrolled students prior to the beginning of the school year. During the school year, newly enrolled students are registered to our Imagine Learning computer program which provides English language study across the modalities with native language supports, and they access it during extended day and from their classroom. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered in our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is ongoing in PS 174 as per CR 154 regulations. A need exists for us to address the academic deficiencies of our ELL students and to support their learning by developing the teachers in best instructional practices for ELLs. Our CEP provides for intensive professional development for teachers in specialized strategies to meet the needs of ELLs at different levels of English language acquisition, as well as addressing the specific needs of individual teachers. Staff development is for new teachers as well as experienced staff members. Professional development is coordinated by the PS 174 Professional Development Team, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Teacher Specialists (including ESL teachers), and Grade Leaders, and our dedicated Model Teacher. The team works together to combine ideas on effective planning for teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ needs for professional development. The team meets regularly to reflect and refine school-based practices and up-date the professional development plans. This team will provide a two-tier approach to staff development designed specifically to assist students as they transition from the elementary to the middle grades. On one level, they will work with staff to strengthen their knowledge base in language acquisition and strategies for scaffolding content area instruction in English. The second level, to be implemented concurrently, will focus on effective practices in the delivery of instruction. Most professional development will be delivered in the teachers’ classrooms. ENL personnel provide assistance to staff to help their ELLs as they transition from one level or grade to another. Classroom teachers are advised about the ELLs in their classes, in terms of their ESL levels and their number of years in an English language school system. By conferring with classroom teachers, ENL teachers provide them with an understanding of each student's strengths and weaknesses, and expectations, from an ENL perspective. These exchanges of information take place during common preparation periods, as well as informally throughout the school year. Teachers also receive support from the PL offering from the Queens South Field Support and DOE ENL specialists. The topics for professional development include acceptance and use of native language writing with upper-grade new arrivals, availability and use of native language and bi-lingual texts, use of pictures and realia to support presentations to students, Imagine Learning and other available ENL software programs for students, websites for ELL students and their teachers, scaffolding instruction and differentiation of instruction for ELLs. These last two topics will prepare all staff to assist our ELLs as they progress from the elementary to the middle school grades. Dates for ELL professional development are: November 5, February 1, and June 9. Our ENL teachers attend Professional Development workshops tailored to ELL instructional strategies offered by the Office of English Language Learners. ENL teachers turnkey strategies during professional development workshops and common planning periods. Common planning periods are included in the choices for a Professional Development Option with support from the ENL teachers as well as the network administrators. Our professional development plan ensures the receipt of 7.5 hours of professional development in the strategies for teaching ELLs for general education staff and 10 hours for special education teachers and special education paraprofessionals, as per Jose P. This training is included on staff development days and as part of our weekly staff development meetings. Sign-in sheets are maintained and strategies discussed are added to our Common Core on-line template. Collaborative lesson planning, professional development every Monday , discussing and implementing the strategies that proved to be efficient in both ELL and mainstream classes. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers turnkey strategies during professional development workshops and common planning periods. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday our ENL teachers meet with parents for the Parent Engagement conferences. At such time, ENL teachers discuss goals of the program, assessment results, update parents on the children's accomplishments, test requirements and accomodations, address parents' concerns and answer their questions. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator, Laura Hui, is actively involved in maintaining and improving communication with all parents, including parents of ELLs, and engaging them in school activities. Parents of ELLs and former ELLS volunteer at lunch and at fundraisers including the book fair, plant sale, and candy sale. A variety of parent workshops in academics: NYC Schools Account training (that replaced ARIS), information on NYS assessments, information on Reading Just Right Books. Learning Leaders training , and information on middle school choices are widely attended by the parents of ELLs. In addition, many parents of ELLs attend our culinary classes and crafting classes in beading, knitting and crocheting, scrap booking, and origami. Some of our parents of ELLs have become certified parent volunteer "Learning Leaders". Wherever necessary, professional translation services are available to assist these parents as they participate in our school activities. We use the Department of Education contracted telephone services as well as the Big Word, Lingualinx and Legal Interpreting Services who provide translated versions of materials distributed to parents. This is particularly useful during academic workshops. Oral translation services are also available through the Big Word, Lingualinx and the Department of Education interpreting service. Specifically for parents of ELLs, there are orientation sessions held throughout the school year. At these conferences, the ELL program requirements, expectations, assessments and standards are explained. Parent surveys and parent letters are provided in the student’s home language. Parents have an opportunity to view a video, in their native language, about bilingual, dual language and ESL programs. Additionally, parents are offered strategies they can use to help their child with homework and ways to increase their child’s English abilities away from school. We partner with Learning Leaders, a nonprofit organization of trained volunteers. They provide math and reading workshops for our parents at PS 174. Through the rigorous pursuit of public, private and corporate grants, we have secured Saturday planting programs for families at our school with the Queens Botanical Gardens, and Saturday family Lego programs, all of which were well attended by school families and well represented by ELL families. Needs of our parents are evaluated on an ongoing basis. All staff, including our parent coordinator, office personnel, classroom teachers, and cluster and support service teachers, are consistently available to speak with parents, and parents do not hesitate to ask questions or to make their needs known. Parents attending workshops complete evaluation forms where they have the opportunity to express their interest in topics for future workshops or training sessions. In addition, a great deal of brainstorming takes place at these meetings on a variety of topics that address the needs of our entire school community. These parent suggestions and concerns are shared with administrators and staff by our parent coordinator. Improvements are made aligned with parents needs wherever feasible. The administration of this school also 2018-19 CEP 63  offers a "First Cup" morning meeting on the first Tuesday of each month, where parents have an open invitation to sit for tea and talk with the principal and assistant principal. This is another place where the needs and ideas of the extended school family are exchanged. As stated above, parents attend academic workshops as well as workshops in the culinary arts and crafting. These activities are widely attended by all our parents including the parents of ELLs. Oral Translation services are available during these sessions through the Department of Education Interpreting Service, the Big Word, and Lingualinx. Written materials to be distributed at these sessions are translated beforehand by translations services. All parental involvement activities address the needs and interests of our parents. These workshops create a welcoming environment for parents to become more involved in their child's school, as well as exposing them to activities that can be done with their child at home. Participation in these activities also provides a stress-free opportunity for parents of ELLs to practice and improve their English skills. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karin Kelly, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William Sidney Mount School DBN: 28Q174 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karin Kelly Title Principal Kerstin Kobetitsch Assistant Principal Laura Hui Parent Coordinator Natalia Lobanova ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elana White Parent Gina Mastrogiacomo Teacher/Subject Area Wendy Bernstein Teacher/Subject Area NA NA TBD Mabel Sarduy Robert Zuzzolo NA NA NA Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Administrator District 28 Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q174 School Name: WS Mount Superintendent: M. Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kerstin Natalia Kobetitsch Lobanova Philip (primary) Romano Assistant Principal ENL Teacher ENL Teacher No Yes Yes No (newly appointed) Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the time of registration, the students and their families are given HLS in their native language to identify what language the child speaks. To ensure that parents understand their choices offered in the District, the orientation meeting is held within the first ten days of their child's enrollment. At such meetings based on HLS information and informal interviews, the data showing the primary language spoken by the parent of each child enrolled in school and whether such parent needs language assistance to communicate with the school staff is collected and further applied in providing parents with all the information they need. Staff reviews Home Language Survey 2018-19 CEP 67  Parent Coordinator surveys teachers about Home Languages PC uses ESL listing of children Use RSDS for home language of all students 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Russian Spanish Chinese/Mandarin Albanian Arabic Dari/Farsi/Persian French Hebrew Indonesian/Bahasa Italian Japanese Korean English Polish Portuguese Uzbek 31 40 47 1 3 3 1 4 1 2 1 3 2.53 3.27 3.84 0.08 0.25 0.25 0.08 0.33 0.08 0.16 0.08 0.25 33 41 51 1 3 3 1 4 1 2 1 3 1081 88.32 1075 2 1 3 0.16 0.08 0.25 2 1 2 2.70 3.35 4.16 0.08 0.25 0.25 0.08 0.33 0.08 0.16 0.08 0.25 87.83 0.16 0.08 0.16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None 2018-19 CEP 68  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Letters Flyers Bill of Rights School Policies Discipline Code School Menu As needed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our findings indicate that parents need all critical information pertaining to their child's education in their native language to provide their support and active involvement in their child's educational process. Language access is a key element in all parental communications. Parents are informed about translation and Interpretation services via the phone, fliers and posters placed at the front entrance. Translation services provide critical information for parents about their child’s education, progress, concerns and other issues that bridge the school and the home of a student. Our staff makes sure that the school uses all possible tools to communicate, whenever feasible, with parents in their home language. Translation services are provided to inform parents of upcoming events, school policies, and include translation of critical communications in the form of a letter, notice, flyer, consent form, translation of behavior code, and other essential documents that help parents understand how they can best assist their child to thrive and accomplish their short- and long term goals. 2018-19 CEP 69  DoE issued translation versions; support provided by bilingual staff DoE Prepared documents As needed Individual student specific conferences or documents As needed Use of per session or per diem for language paraprofessionals Hire from the Big Word for non-covered languages. Use of translation funds for non-covered languages. School Website Includes notice of events, school policies, letters, presentations, school calendar, et al. Ongoing - renewed in Fall and updated then monthly Website inlcudes Google translate option Links to alternate languages are available. Parent Surveys and emails Daily and Weekly from teachers Use of Signup.com Use of google translate Included in Parent Coordinator's weekly email; links to dominate languages needed for our community (Russian, Spanish, Chinese.) Use of APPs that use many languages already on parents cell phones/computers. Individual notes/student specific conferences or documents As needed Use of translation funds Use of per session or per diem for language paraprofessional Hire from the Big Word for all student/family specific needs 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Orientation Meetings September and ongoing during registration of new students The school provides the oral, face-to-face interpretation services at parent 2018-19 CEP 70  Parent Conferences such as Meet the teacher; Back-to-School; Curriculum Night September, November, February and May Informal conferences Ongoing - Tuesdays during parent engagement time. orientation meetings, during parent-teacher conferences, over-the-phone teacher-parent conferences, and during routine parent's visits. Interpretation services are provided by the in-school professionals and paraprofessional staff who speak an ELL parent’s native language and can bridge communication between parents and staff. In-house interpretation and translation services provide parents immediate attention to their concerns and needs. Per diem Per session On the spot interpretation Per diem as needed Per session for after school/evenings On the spot interpretation - language paraprofessionals and other school staff (SW, CG, PC, teachers.) Use of telephone Interpretation Services Hire of language interpreters Per diem as needed Per session for after school/evenings On the spot interpretation language paraprofessionals and other bilingual school staff (SW, GC, PC, teachers.) Use of telephone Interpretation Services Hire of language interpreters 2018-19 CEP 71  Parent Workshops Ongoing Per diem as needed Per session for after school/evenings On the spot interpretation language paraprofessionals and other bilingual school staff (SW, GC, PC, teachers.) Use of telephone Interpretation Services Hire of language interpreters 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Remind.com - Parent Communication App that is sent a text message to individual parent's phone in their preferred language. Phone message system - Blackboard Connect - automated system that has the ability to provide messages sent in a parent's preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Back-to-School Meeting with all staff, including administrative, office, and instructional (teachers and paraprofessionals.) Inclusion of LTI Plan in school Google Drive Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided with the Parent Bill of Rights, The Family Guide and Translation and Interpretation Guides distributed in multiple languages by the DOE at the beginning of each school year. In-house multilingual posters provide limited English proficient individuals with instructions on where to obtain interpretation or translation 2018-19 CEP 72  services. We have appropriate school signage forms for all predominant languages and for about half of our other languages. Many of our parents can read English even though they speak another language at home. We provide oral translations of school forms for those that cannot read English. By planning in advance, school documents are translated and ready for distribution at the same time as the English version. Translation services are provided by the NYCDOE contracted vendor, "The big word." We also utilize our school aides, paraprofessionals, nurse, and parent volunteers. The DOE provides written translations for most languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback forms are distributed, returned and analyzed for parent input. We review who attended the events and what they thought about them . This information is very important for us to review and revise including parent feedback. Our team works to design additional information sessions, engagement activities, enrichment activities and workshops for families. The home/school connection is vital in developing the relationship among staff and families. Attendance at all events is tallied and reported via the Parent Coordinator's accountability site. We have made changes to our offerings based on the responses to our surveys. Some include: Saturday events; morning, afternoon and evening events; more "open house" offerings that are schoolwide and not just grade or class specific. 2018-19 CEP 73 
