2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q181 School Name: P.S. 181 BROOKFIELD Principal: DINA WHEELER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Brookfield School 342900010181 Pre-Kindergarten-5 th grade School Number (DBN): 29Q181 148-15 230 th Street Springfield Gardens, NY 11413 718-528-5807 718-723-7825 Phone Number: Fax: Dina A. Wheeler Dwheele2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dina A. Wheeler Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Stacey Korman-Vargas Tracey Trottman Dina A. Wheeler Antoinette Prince N/A N/A District Information Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191st Street Queens, NY 11423 BMitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 Phone Number: 718-217-7739 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Queens, NY mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dina A. Wheeler/ Michael Brown Stacey Korman-Vargas Tracey Trottman Tiffany Bowers Antoinette Prince Amanda McCormack Elizabeth Williams *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Paul Lawrence Katrina Gordon Angelina Hicks Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? As a collaborative school community of educators and parents, we are committed to a high quality of instruction, where the expectation for all students is to achieve high standards of academic excellence. . Our school mission is the belief that all children can achieve mastery. We want to create a community of life-long learners. We are all committed to reflecting upon and refining our practice in order to strengthen the integration of the citywide instructional expectations to prepare all students, including students with disabilities. English Language Learners to graduate college. We will use a common language and build a shared understanding of highly quality instruction. 2018-19 CEP 9  The physical, intellectual, emotional and social growth of all students including English Language learners, Special Education students within the New York Continuum, gifted and talented, and pupils in need of Academic Intervention Services will be discussed and assessed at Parent Teacher Conferences, staff conferences, PTA meetings and school leadership committee meetings. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The process for creating the CEP reflects the collaborative culture of our school community. The CEP was presented to the school community as a document that represented many of the goals and initiatives on which we have been working through structures such as grade meetings, SLT meetings and other venues. The administrators and teachers participated in discussions to understand the goals and expectations for the school year, including Teacher Effectiveness, CCLS instructional shifts and special education reform. The teacher teams began discussing the CEP during their planned Teacher Team meetings. They reflected on their pedagogy in order to contribute to the development of this document. The final part of this process was to gather all individuals to revise and redistribute, and approve for final submission. Our school has a partnership with Hofstra University. Teachers and teams get professional development in math instructions that will improve pedagogy as well as student achievement. Hence teachers are able to share best practices with parents that will help their children at home. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school is the first in District 29 to host a Horizon Autism program in Kindergarten. These students are now entering 4th grade. This is a small class of 4-8 students that have been diagnosed with emotional differences but are still functioning on or above grade level. We have now moved these students on to fourth grade and are looking forward to continuing student achievement in the fall. Our goal is to mainstream our students and have them learn in the least restricted environment. We have scheduled play time so that the students in this program and general education students are able to interact socially. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One area of progress is building strong family-community ties. Our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meeting held once a month was very poorly attendant. During PTA meetings we recognized Student of the Month. Hence our parent attendance was limited to 10 students. After discussion with the SLT we decided to change the awards to Student Recognition and have grade performances. Teachers gave awards to several students under different categories (math, citizenship, spelling, science, technology, etc). The grade performance s are done in the evening for parents and in the afternoon for the school. The attendance during PTA tripled. Now, we are able to have good attendance to discuss school goals, recognize student achievements, and address family concerns. We are also able to invite community based organizations to assist parents with student and family wellness. This forum has brought the community closer. The school building is more welcoming. The parents appreciate being kept informed about events and all school business. In order to continually increase differentiated instruction, our school has also used student data to promote grade level instruction for enriched learning. Hence there are students receiving enriched instruction from teachers across the grade. Also, our 4th and 5th grade is departmentalized to allow the students to receive instruction in the content areas according to the teacher’s strength. Finally we are allowing students in a self-contained classroom to receive ELA or Math instruction from the general education classroom on a daily basis. We are a CS4ALL and Algebra 4 ALL school. We are in our 2nd year of delivering computer science too all of our students. Our 4th and 5th graders receive Algebra 4 All instructions. A key area of focus for this school year will be improving rigorous instruction across all grades. Our teachers are learning to promote student growth and challenge students to analyze, synthesize and critically evaluate their work. Through professional development and professional learning all teachers will discover how rigor helps student 2018-19 CEP 10  develop the capacity to understand content that is complex and emotionally challenging. This calls for raising the expectation level for every student and allowing the student to demonstrate their learning at high levels. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q181 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 326 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 55 56 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 21 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 66.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 12.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.17 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 23 22 92.5% 5.5% 26.7% 79.4% 2.1% 6.1% 2 6% 6 26.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to continually increase differentiated instruction, our school has also used student data from the results of math assessments in Go Math, F and Ps, guided reading, science, social studies, periodic assessments in ELA and Math to promote grade level instruction for enriched learning. Hence there are students receiving enriched instruction from teachers across the grade. Also, our 3rd-5 th grade is departmentalized to allow the students to receive instruction in the content areas according to the teacher’s strength. Finally we are allowing students in a self-contained classroom to receive ELA or Math instruction from the general education classroom on a daily basis. A key area of focus is to increase writing across of content areas. We are also focusing on increasing vocabulary to improve reading, writing and math comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 85% of our students will have moved at least 3 reading levels as determined by F and P assessments and the NYC performance task in reading and math. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Small group instruction: Students identified as far below or at risk of failing far below grade level will receive small group support from teacher. They will receive any needed remediation in phonics as well as support in developing fluency. These students will receive this instruction through daily guided reading lessons, Interactive writing and push-in/pull out AIS support. Students identified as on target or exceeding will receive accelerated instruction. Classroom teachers will differentiate instruction through planning of small group work. . Students identified as far below or at-risk far below grade level Professional Development: Classroom teachers work twice a month with the math cluster, model teacher and administrators. They will provide support in assessment, planning for rigor and instruction. The model teacher is placing an emphasis on small group practices. Classroom teachers The school will host a curriculum meetings and provide a parent resource library. Teachers and parents Administrators, teachers, data specialist, Academic Intervention , ESL teachers, parents coordinator Administrators and, selected teachers, model teacher Parent Coordinator September 2018-Nov. 2018 Nov.-Jan 2019 Jan-Mar. 2019 Mar.-May 2019 Beginning Sept. 5, 2018 and continuing monthly Beginning Sept 5, 2018- and continuing monthly Classroom teachers will host workshops with parents. The workshops materials used will be translated and support will be provided in their language Classroom teacher works once a month with a funded consultant from Hofstra University intensive practice program. He will provide support in assessment and responsive classroom techniques. Classroom Teachers Beginning Sept. 2018- and continuing monthly Administrators teachers, Model teacher staff developer 2018-19 CEP 14  SWD and ENL students will receive RTI 5 days a week to improve reading comprehension SWD ENL students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Beginning Sept 5, 2018- daily Classroom teacher, IEP teacher, ENL teacher, supportive staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Engagement Workshop lead by Parent Coordinator and supportive staff. Teacher Lead Parent Workshop on Tuesday Parent Teacher Conference in November, March, and May Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Monday Professional Learning ● Common planning periods ● Professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019,100% of the teachers will meet with school administrators during teacher team meetings, grade meetings, common preparation periods, or individually to review, discuss, reflect and plan using the results of the F and P assessments and NYC performance tasks in Math given to the students. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, review progress in F and P assessments and NYC performance tasks, make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2018 school survey, the school has established a culture for learning that consistently communicates high academic expectations to staff and students through the implementation of the Danielson Framework and the instructional shifts. Through PBIS and Character Education we have established a culture of learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Moving forward, the school will get a deeper understanding of why the consistent study of these character traits is important for student growth and self esteem. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will continue to establish a culture for learning through our Character Education program structure all students, including ELLs and SWDs, and demonstrate progress of at least 5% increase in positive behavior as measured by the results of the school wide Class Dojo the teachers are using to promote positive behavior. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Character education lessons, student work and bulletin boards emphasizing character traits. Students Staff Sept. 5, 2018-June 28, 2019 Student anecdotes, progress reports PBIS expectations Mentor plans to support new teachers with strategies During Teacher Team meetings create a “Student Protocol Model” to discuss students, share practices, strategies, challenges and elicit input from colleagues on possible next steps to support students students Sept. 5, 2018-June 28, 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselor Implementation of NYCDOE Respect for All and attendance mentor program Target small groups for instruction daily as well as working with students in the socio-emotional domain. Parent Workshops led by Social Worker, SBST and Social Emotional Consultant Parents Character Education Parent Assemblies Sept. 5, 2018-June 28, 2019 Staff, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor 2018-19 CEP 18  Character Education Monthly Newsletter 100% parent participation connection to Class Dojo Workshops for SWD and ENL parents to ensure parents are knowledgeable of how to increase academic growth by building on confidence and self esteem Parents Sept 5, 2018-June 28, 2019 ENL teacher, IEP Teacher monthly Parent Coordinator Administrative staff Technology Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher lead- Saturday Workshops Title I funded - Parent Coordinator Monthly Parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Monday PD time as per the UFT contract * Common planning time for teachers *Teachers present and turn-key best practices to new teachers *Book Study: Culturally Responsive Teaching & The Brain, by Zaretta Hammond Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  December 2018- analyze behavior survey and OORS data February 2019- Anecdotal and progress reports Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019 100% the teachers will review progress measured by Class Dojo, and the progress report to measure if strategies have decreased incidence in OORS data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher's plan instruction such as curriculum mapping collaborative lesson planning. This ensures that all stakeholders know what needs to be addressed to meet students' goals throughout a unit. Modifying the plans by using data to help the student in the area of concern. Administrators will assist in the process to ensure alignment to the CCLS. Assessment data will provide feedback to students on a consistent basis to also enable timely adjustments to curricula and instruction. According to the results of the Measure of Student Learning, compared to the growth of similar students our students are not making meeting or exceeding their goals across grades. Common assessments across the grade should be created during common planning time to ensure all students are receiving the same materials and skills that will increase academic growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of student achievement will increase by 5% as measured by the ELA and Math performance task . Teachers mid year assessments will be conducted with adjustments to curriculum maps, common assessments and lesson planning by teacher teams. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 100% of the teachers will use Reading A-Z and to track and measure student reading comprehension progress when using the computer lab. All students September 2018-May, 2019 Administrators, Selected teachers Guided reading 100% of the students in grades PreK-1st grade ABC Mouse Professional development: Teachers Core Knowledge Ready Gen ELA instructional support- Higher order thinking questions Depth of Knowledge and data driven instruction September 2018-May 2019 Administrators Selected teachers Classroom teachers and Parent Coordinators will host workshops and information session with parents throughout the year. The workshop materials used will be translated and interpretation support will be provided in the dominant language spoken by parents in the school. Parents September 2018- May 2019 Administrators, Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 22  Monthly Parent Engagement on Tuesdays lead by teachers and PC Parent Teacher meetings Teacher Lead Saturday Workshops Dad Discussion lead by AP Monthly PTA Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common planning time, lunch and learns, ● Research Study about parent involvement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 Initial informal and formal observations with immediate feedback from administrators to teachers Developing lesson plans and implementation of the lesson February 2019-June 2019 Informal and formal observations checkpoint to monitor improvement on lesson planning. Teacher Team meetings/common planning time will be used to adjust curriculum mapping and/or lesson plans to meet students' needs when necessary Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Principal Performance review of 2017-2018 teacher's practice using the Danielson Framework is uneven, resulting in student learning having limited opportunities for instruction that is responsive to individual learning needs. Administrators will work with staff to develop their capacity to ensure that teachers are consistently using checks for understanding practices to assess and plan for daily lessons so that students are met at their entry points. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, . 85% of the classroom staff will improve pedagogy practice in Domain 3d (assessments ) techniques of the Danielson's framework as measured in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Learning opportunities will be provided that focus on the development of student writing in math and ELA, and will be planned collaboratively with the Professional Learning Committee. Teachers will be provided with frequent feedback for Advance, as well as informally. Teachers Teachers will engage in differentiated learning opportunities including: collaborative learning with the Teachers), Inter-visitation, activities identified in Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP), and choice based on interest or area identified for growth. Teachers Teachers Beginning Sept. 5, 2018 Professional Learning Committee, Administrators Administrators Model teachers June 26, 2019 Monthly Beginning Sep 5 2018-June 26, 2019 Monthly Beginning Sept. 5, 2018 June 26, 2019 Weekly School leaders will support trust by regularly calibrating and norming ratings and feedback School Leaders BeginningSept. 5, 2018 School Leaders June 26, 2019 Monthly Beginning School leaders will support SWD and ENL with pull out and push in services by supported teachers. Teachers Sept.5, 2018 Special Ed. Teachers June 26, 2019 Daily ENL Teacher School Leader 2018-19 CEP 25  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent workshops beginning Sept 5th-June 26, 2019-Simone Brown (PC) Monthly PTA meetings PTA Board Saturday Workshops beginning January 2019-Lead Teachers and Administrators Bi monthly Tuesday Parent Engagement Teachers and Administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Monday Professional Learning ● Common planning periods ● Professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the February 2019 SLT meeting the members will review teacher growth data in component 3d of the Danielson Framework compared to the results of the domain in 3D. Feedback will be analyzed throughout the year to inform our professional learning plan. Frequent monitoring of Advance reports with a focus on 3D. Time scheduled for individual teachers or teams of teachers to work with school based coaches. Time scheduled for individual teachers or teams of teachers to work with Administrators and Model Teacher Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019 we will use the Informal and Formal observations as a mid check point to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Snapshot, 90% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how the staff can help their children learn. However,the city average is 92%. Although the teachers and parent coordinator schedule workshops throughout the school year, the participation rate is low. Statistic shows that student achievement is related to parent engagement. Our goal is to create a Facebook or Class Dojo account to increase parent engagement through social media. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In June 2018, we will increase by 5% in strong family-community ties in the School Quality Snapshot through the implementation of various programs, such as monthly assemblies, parent workshops, Music in the Brain Grant Program, Disney Jr musical Grant, and Computer Science for ALL. . The programs will continue to promote student diversity, strong family and community ties using our school website and Class DoJo. to communicate to our parents. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A variety of workshops will be provided including Common Sense Parenting and Learning Leaders. The Parent Coordinator will meet with each Learning Leader to discuss interests, talents, and how they can best support the school. The Parent Coordinator will develop a calendar of monthly offering for parents. Families To support trust, we will provide online newsletters to families with an overview of the curriculum for the upcoming month, as well as strategies that families can use at home to support the classroom instruction. Families Monthly grade assemblies, winter and spring concerts, monthly class celebrations and performances to foster strong family ties to support the goal. Parents Sept 5th 2018- June 26, 2019 Monthly Sept 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 Monthly Sept 5 2018-June 26, 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Teachers Teachers Administrators Monthly Parent Coordinator Hour of Code for parents to promote support computer science at home. Families December 2018 Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Rosedale Library Hoftra University Cornucopia Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 28  The resources we will leverage to achieve this annual goal will include the Music in the Brain Grant and Title III funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 our SLT will review the number of active parents not limited to Learning Leaders supporting our school, and the number of parents participating in Parent Association meetings, Breakfast with the Principal, and active class parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In June 2019, we will increase by 5% in strong family-community ties in the School Quality Snapshot through the implementation of various programs, such as monthly assemblies, parent workshops, Music in the Brain Grant Program, Disney Jr musical Grant, and Computer Science for ALL. . The programs will continue to promote student diversity, strong family and community ties using our school website and Class DoJo. to communicate to our parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Close reading Small group One-to –one Push in When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day AIS Saturday Academy Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Periodic Assessments Running records Ready Gen Tasks Response to Intervention Teacher Assessment Students who fall below a level2 per grade level on periodic assessments, F&P running records, ready gen tasks, teacher assessment will receive AIS. Periodic Assessments Running records Focus MATH Intensive Intervention Small group One-to –one Push in During the school day AIS Saturday Academy Small group During school Math Tasks Science Teacher Assessments Exemplars Teacher Assessment Internet 4 classroom Projects 2018-19 CEP 30  Social Studies Teacher Assessments closereading Small group During school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Projects Counseling Speech Nurse PBIS Small group During school One-to –one Science teacher Classroom teacher Technology teacher 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. * School supplies Students will receive a bookbag with notebooks, pens, pencils, and folders * monitoring attendance The attendance team will monitor student attendance. Supply school transportation if needed * AIS support Academic intervention if the student meets the criteria for extra support in ELA and/or Math * At risk guidance Providing student with support (guidance, social worker, parent coordinator, administrators, teachers, etc) during their temporary setting. Making sure they are adjusting and still able to perform academically. *Community Service Through can and coat drives, making sure the student and families are receiving food and clothing during temporary housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school recruits teachers from a variety of sources including references from, but not limited to, school-based and borough field support center. Prospective employees participate in interviews and provide demonstration lessons that are observed by both administrators as well as potential grade-level colleagues. Feedback is solicited from all parties and is considered during the decision-making process. The determination of assignments is discussed and determined by the administrators and teacher. If departmentalized teachers are chosen by their strength, determined by the results of students' assessment and results of the teacher evaluation rubric. The school provides opportunities for teachers to participate in ongoing professional development provided by the borough field support center in addition to partnerships with a local university. Teachers also benefit from workshops offered centrally by staff employed by publishers of the core ELA and mathematics programs. The school maintains a community bulletin board which advertises additional supports available to teachers which are provided by other agencies and/or partners. Where applicable, the school offers new teachers school-based mentoring. The school also offers flexible scheduling options to facilitate the sharing of information across the school community. This provides teachers with additional insight into professional development activities which they may not have attended, but were attended by other school-based staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school structure provides regularly scheduled blocks of time that are dedicated to collaborative inquiry. During this time teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards as the foundation for any supplemental instructional initiatives and/or assessments that they design, administer and analyze. These sessions are guided by professional research which articulates best practices which are, in turn, implemented in classrooms. The school provides teachers and paraprofessionals with supplemental instructional resources which are aligned to the CCLS which are designed to promote student engagement in complex texts which are representative of the 2018-19 CEP 34  standards. More specifically, the school’s instructional focus addresses vocabulary development as an embodiment of one of the Common Core Instructional Shifts. Administrators attend regularly scheduled meetings led by network staff members which are designed to insure that the school’s personnel is familiar with the instructional expectations of the CCLS. Teachers are able to pick from a menu of professional development workshops led by teachers who have attended workshops. The teachers will turn key new methods and instructional programs. These teachers share best practices that will improve instruction which will be measured by the teacher observation rubric. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school sponsors workshops for parents who are new to the elementary school program. These workshops are conducted by both pre-kindergarten teachers as well as the pre-kindergarten assigned social worker. Administrators also conduct workshops for parents during which they introduce the Common Core Learning Standards to parents and outline both school-based expectations and recommend and provide guidance regarding activities in which parents can engage their children at home. Pre-kindergarten teachers engage in annual, individualized screening sessions with all students. This exercise allows teachers to identify the need for any additional support that may assist students in their social and academic development. As a result, parents may be informed about the availability of early intervention services that may benefit their children. The PreK professional development is determined by the focus of study of the program. Our PreK teachers attend the workshops approximately 3 times a school year to improve on assessing, instruction and pedagogy on a specific instructional track. 2018-19 CEP 35  School personnel communicates with other educational institutions that students have attended in order to better serve the academic and social needs of individual students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers were given the latitude to develop units of study and design CCLS-aligned assessments collaboratively including rubrics, checklists, etc. 2. Teachers select the performance-based tasks in which their students will engage in order to assess their learning during multiple checkpoints of a unit of study. 3. Grade conferences serve as additional opportunities for professional development. During these conferences teachers share assessment with administrators and identify students’ strengths and weaknesses at individual, class and grade levels. Assessments include, but are not limited to, item analyses which target specific standards teachers may revisit. These results are used to determine next instructional steps as teachers work toward student mastery. 4. Professional Development Team and Inquiry Team meet monthly to look at student work to decide which assessment will be used to determine student progress after 6 weeks of teaching by the teacher. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 146,341.00 31,002 0 0 2,040,177.00 X X x 2018-19 CEP 36 Column B Section Reference(s) X X  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 37   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PS181Q The Brookfield School Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS181Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS181Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 41  PS 181Q The Brookfield School PS 181Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Brookfield School Borough Queens School Number 181 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dina A. Wheeler Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marie Pyram Teacher/Subject Area Laura Carberry/Science Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Katrina Gordon/Technology Related-Service Provider Kerry Botta Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Michael Brown Coach type here School Counselor Gaell Blackman Parent Faadia Guiness-PTA President Parent Coordinator Simone Brown Field Support Center Staff Member Marie-Antoinette Rousseau Other (Name and Title) Elizabeth Burke-School Psych C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 45  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 309 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.56% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool our school use to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS is Fountas and Pinnell, the Voyager Passport Response to Intervention program assessments, as well as teacher-made assessments. Also, our school uses the annual data from NYSITELL and NYSELAT. Also, data from New York State ELA exam is used to guide instructional planning for our ELLS. Based on the data from these exams, the insight that is provided about our ELLs is that extra help within phonics, reading, and writing is needed. This data helps inform our school's instructional plan by ensuring that the environment in the classrooms are print rich and that emphasis be placed on comprehensive phonics, reading, writing, and vocabulary assignments during stand alone and integrated ENL. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 46  4 times a year the classroom teachers assess all students including ELLs with Fountas and Pinnell Books to obtain their reading level. The student is then expected to read books on their level during classroom independent reading, and he/she is provided with a book-baggie with several books on their level to answer comprehensive questions for homework assignments. The Voyager Passport RTI program assessment is given to students multiple times a year to determine whether the students including ELLs need RTI, and the progress they've made after RTI. Based on the RTI examination, the student is placed in small learning groups daily which teaches phonemic awareness, reading, and writing skills.The teacher-made assessments are ongoing throughout the year to see student weaknesses and strengths in certain academic skills taught in the classroom. Steps are taken to provide students with extra practice or more challenging work if needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL program is measured based upon periodic assessments, class portfolios and exams, NYSELAT, local and citywide and ELA and Math state assessments. In addition, teachers assess students periodically through running records, conferencing, and end of chapter assessments. These assessments are used to drive instruction to meet the needs of ELL students. We meet AYP for ELLs with differentiated rigorous instruction in all content areas(ELA, math, SS, & science), with a heavy focus on vocabulary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, we find ELL area(s) of need. We use this data to drive instruction and to differentiate to meet the needs of all ELL students. Both in stand alone and integrated ENL, students receive RTI along with multi-sensory approaches to facilitate instruction. ENL teacher focuses on those areas, as well as modifies methods and materials to help student be successful in the classroom. ENL teacher provides DATA to classroom teachers, so that they can focus on those areas in their lessons. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school wide RTI model is connected to assessment. This approach facilitates targeted intervention based on the identified needs of the students, including ELLs. The students results on running records and other baseline assessments and curriculum specific assessments are considered when targeting students for academic intervention. In keeping with the RTI model, students are assessed multiple times each year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data pattern between the NYSITELL and the NYSELAT shows that some students may show progress from Beginning on the NYSITELL to Expanding on the NYSELAT within one school year. Other students, however, may progress from Expanding on the NYSITELL to Transitioning on the NYSELAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teacher uses RLAT from ATS to get ELL DATA at the beginning of the school year. This data shows student raw scores on the four modalities of the NYSELAT as well as ELL language proficiency levels. ENL teacher provides classroom teachers with this data , and uses this data to drive instruction as previously stated. Also, EDUR is sent from the principal /FSC to ENL teacher in order to get ELL DATA throughout the school year. The ENL teacher uses the data from the EDUR to make changes to programming and to correct ATS data. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 47  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL/ESL program is offered both in Standalone/Pull Out and Intergrated /Push In formats. The ELL students based on the language proficiency on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes or 180 minutes of instruction per week. The entering and emerging ELL students who receive 360 minutes receive 90 or 180 minutes of standalone ENL, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/Content Area instruction. The transitioning and expanding ELL students who receive 180 minutes of instruction, receive Integrated ENL/Content Area instruction, however the transitioning ELLs may receive 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated instruction. The ELL students in the standalone program travels as a group with approximately 5 students in a group. The 5 students are in two contiguous grades. The students who participate in the Stand alone program are engaged in heterogeneous small group instruction. At times they may work in pairs to complete specific tasks. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school administrator and ENL teacher reviews the program model(ELL Policy and Reference Guide) and the RLAT list and devise a schedule in order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided to ELLs. According to the program model, the Entering and Emerging ELLs must receive 90/180 minutes of Stand alone ENL, and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/Content Area. The Transitioning ELLs can receive 90 minutes of Stand alone and/or 90 minutes of integrated ENL/Content Area instruction. Expanding ELLs can receive 180 integrated ENL Content Area instruction. The expanding students receive integrated instruction only. The ELLS who become proficient receive 2 years of 90 minute Integrated ENL in ELA/ Content Area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Stand Alone program model, the ELLs are using trade books which are aligned to their instructional levels and cater to both their academic and language proficiency needs and the Common Core Learning Standards . In the Integrated ENL/ Content Area program model, the ENL teacher co-plans and co-teaches with the classroom teacher(ELA, Science, math) using the grade curriculum which adheres to the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional methods which are used include building background with the students prior to exploring the focus text as well as engaging students in simplified read aloud which are connected to the same topic. Students are introduced to new vocabulary which they may encounter while reading the core text closely so that they may have more success with the text. When working with other students who share the same native language, students are able to support each other through "turn and talk" protocols which allow them to deepen their understanding of the content. In alignment with the Common Core's Speaking and Listening Standards, these positive literacy practices assist the students in their effort to understand what they read. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish LAB, the mid and end chapter classroom assessments, and the State Science and Math exams ensure that ELLs are evaluated in their home languages throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status When we have SIFE students, based on the questionnaire and the LENS, we see the student's academic deficiencies and provide targeted instruction. The SIFE students receive extra academic support during AIS and RTI. For the newcomer ELL students who have been in the country for 0-3 years, during Stand Alone ENL, classroom literacy block, and AIS, students utilize big books, shared reading and guided reading, complete phonics activities, use picture cards, and teacher-mate hand held device integrating technology and basic ELA skills, which helps to build the foundation 2018-19 CEP 48  of English language acquisition. We also use Starfall, abcmouse, Razkids and other computer-based programs to strengthen phonemic awareness and reading comprehension skills. For the low Intermediate and Intermediate ELLs their progress is carefully monitored and assessed. The ENL teacher spends a great deal of time reviewing and practicing skills that are assessed both on the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA exam. Such skills include reading comprehension, main idea, grammar, listening, speaking, and writing. Also the classroom teacher uses graphic organizers, note-taking, pre-writing, and self editing. Teachers collaboratively reflect on their practice and look at student data to inform instructional decisions to insure academic rigor. For the Long Term ELLs , both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher continue to administer and analyze classroom assessments, periodic and state exams to determine student academic deficiencies. Targeted instruction in ELA or Math. We continue to give them additional support during AIS and RTI. The former ELLS continue to receive 90 minutes of Integrated instruction in ENL/ELA for two years. Also they continue to receive Academic Intervention Services in the needed skill. ELLs and Former ELLs are typically afforded testing accommodations which will permit them to demonstrate the skills that they have acquired. Students are given the opportunity to use bilingual word to word glossaries, extended time and a separate testing location. All this information is shaped by the content found in the Administrator's Testing Manual produced by the state. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs receive instruction based on their IEPs and goals. Instruction of ELLs with IEPs are discussed on a regular basis with classroom teachers, speech pathologist, and occupational/ physical therapists. The ELLs and ELLs with disabilities still participate using the same instructional materials as other students. Ready Gen and Core Knowledge provide literacy support to students and the Go Math product provides mathematical content knowledge. Teachers are able to access information through support guides which provide suggestions for assisting ELLs in accessing the content. We use workbooks in language arts, SS, science, and math that have rich vocabulary, and emphasize on prior knowledge and multisensory activities. Technology programs such as starfall, Razkids, abcmouse, and other programs are used. Also both classroom teachers and the ENL teacher use graphic organizers such as the Frayer Model to help support the development of vocabulary skills. The technology teacher requires students to communicate through reading and writing through the use of a program which would be categorized as social media for students; through Class Dojo and PS181 Website, students and their parents are able to receive assignments and links to further content which provides enrichment for their classroom learning. At times, these materials may be delivered in another language to support the student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by having ICT classrooms, Integrated ENL teaching , mainstreaming at gym, computer lab, math, and lunch periods. Field trips and the Push in model supports the curriculum. Based on students' IEP goals and Wechsler Individual Achievement test, we assess student needs. ENL teacher and classroom teachers use such strategies as differentiation, rephrasing/reframing questions, which allow students the ability to think critically while working at their independent levels. The school maintains a School Implementation Team which regularly reviews the status of students with IEPs. The students' academic and social progress is considered and thoroughly discussed with all of the parties who interact with the student prior to considering a student's placement in an alternate setting for all or part of the school day. Ongoing communication with the students' parents is also a huge part of the decision making process when considering the student's least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Service(AIS), is received daily for 30 minutes four days a week. Students who have been formally identified through a thorough screening process are selected to participate in a RTI program after their parents are notified. Our school's uses the Voyager Passport program which focuses on fluency, comprehension, letter and letter-sound recognition. Students are instructed in small groups of no more than 8 students each and are presented with instructional materials which span the content areas of literature, social studies, science, etc. The small number of ELL students easily allows them to be a part of the intervention groups being provided support by the classroom teacher; however, their status as ELLs doesn't mandate their participation. As this intervention is provided by the classroom teacher, native language support is not offered during this time period, but may extend into other areas when this controlled, structured program concludes daily. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends,the mandated minutes of the Integrated ENL Program will be improved for the upcoming school year 2017-2018. Firstly, ENL teacher will co-plan and co-teach with content area teachers more throughout the school year. The ENL teacher will turnkey information gained from ENL workshops to content area teachers, to better assist ELLs in their academic achievement.This will improve ELLs' academic achievement in the classroom, as well as on their city and state test scores. This year we have implemented the social studies passport program online and math intervention program for all students. We are also becoming part of the STEAM science program by having trained teachers teach students about coding. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 49  We never had a bilingual program. We do not have 20 or more students speaking the same language in 2 contiguous grades. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are a vital part of every avenue of the school experience just as all other students. Upon registration, parents receive a tri-fold which lists the many programs that are offered at the school, including, but not limited to the student council, College Day,Field Day, Class Trips,Disney Kids Theater Production, Family Fun Day, Breast Cancer Walk, Autism Walk, Annual Talent Show, and Family Game Night . The Parent Coordinator regularly hosts workshops and invites parents to volunteer in the school. The school advertises school wide activities through an automated service which provides outreach through telephone calls, text messages and emails. The service automatically translates the messages into various languages. ELLs, who are placed in various classrooms throughout the school participate as all other students, at times on a voluntary basis to address their interest, and sometimes as a more formalized part of their school experience. We have a daily after school program available to ELLs, Title III Program, and After-School test prep during the months of February, March and the beginning of April. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Math textbooks are provided in Spanish. In our technology program, we use different programs such as abcmouse, razkids, starfall, and activity works that include bilingual activities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, the ELL students have content area glossaries that are kept both in the ENL room and in their classwork folders to assist students with academic language in both their native and new language. The students also have access to books in their native languge in the ENL room. Also in the ENL room are posters of academic language cognates to aid students. In addition, ELL students have access to a donated DVD with academic bilingual activities and games 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All implemented instructional activities and materials such as Go Math and Ready Gen are state approved, grade aligned and meet the Common Core Learning Standards. Also, Ready Gen provides tips and strategies on how to help ELLS with specific reading and writing skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share our building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently the newly enrolled ELLs receive services at the start of the school year and through out the year. Before the beginning of the school year, we encourage parents of ELLs to have the students participate in free summer school program, and summer camp programs. These programs are to ensure that the ELLs continue to practice language and social skills with their native English speakers. Activities for ELLs enrolled at the beginning and throughout the school year includes our Title III After-school Program,Disney kids Theater Production, Annual talent show, Monthly class assemblies, and Student elections for student council. Staff members that are involved in the activities include ENL teacher, parent coordinator, school counselor, PTA president, teachers, and parent volunteers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: In which language(s) is each core content area taught? a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. N/A Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 50  At the beginning of the school year, and during professional development sessions, the ENL teacher meets with all teachers of ELLs, assistant principal, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, social worker, special education teachers, school psychologist, OT and PT, speech therapist, secretary, and parent coordinator and informs them of new state standards for ELLs and shows them a webinar on the DELLSS website regarding new regulations(Part 154-2). Also, the ENL teacher meets with teachers of ELLs throughout the year for Professional Learning to share important information about how ELLs learn different subjects, How to help ELLs develop vocabulary and other useful data. The ENL teacher attends several professional development sessions and ELL workshops from the FSC throughout the year as well as views webinars, and turn-keys the information to teachers of ELLs. The ENL teacher also co-plans and participates in the team teaching meetings with other classroom teachers. During Co-planning and team teaching meetings, focus is with the goal of the students being able to achieve the standards. With this in mind, standards-based student work is analyzed collaboratively. As well, discussion centers around the best instructional practices that should be used in order to support the academic growth of all students, inclusive of the ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school makes sure that teachers of ELLs receive their 15% total hours by attending external workshops/PDs throughout the school year or in the summer months. Also the ENL teacher provides professional learning(PL) sessions, where the ENL teacher turn keys information from her external PDs and workshops dedicated to language acquisition, focuses on best practices for co-teaching and integrates language content instruction for all ELLs. The school ensures that the ENL teacher attends all the PDs and ELL workshops, and webinars in order to meet the required number of hours.Records that include agendas and attendance during the PL hours are kept by both the ENL teacher and the Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Parent Coordinator calls the parents of ELLs and informs them of the date chosen for their annual meeting. The ENL teacher along with an on-site translator from the school building,The Big Word, or Language and Interpretation Unit(over-the phone interpretation), discusses the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, and needs in all subject areas. The parents are explained the goals set for their child at the beginning of the year during Parent Orientation in September. During Annual meeting, ENL teacher and parent examines test scores throughout the year, and determine whether the student has obtained or is in the process of obtaining those goals. Also, during the annual meeting there is discussion of upcoming ELL periodic and state exams,promotion criteria for ELLs, as well as how parents can better prepare their child for the next grade. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Activities that foster ELL parent involvement are workshops administered by the Parent Coordinator. These workshops include arts and crafts, Immigration information, Breast cancer walk, and multicultural events. Also, ELL parents are encouraged to assist during class trips, field day activities, and as school assistants in the classroom and lunchroom. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 51  2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dina Wheeler, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S.181 Brookfield School School DBN: 29181Q Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dina A. Wheeler Title Principal Michael Brown Assistant Principal Simone Brown Parent Coordinator Marie Pyram ENL/Bilingual Teacher Guiness Parent Laura Carberry/Science Teacher Katrina Gordon/Computer teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Gaell Blackman School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Marie-Antoinette Rousseau Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Elizabeth Ryan Other School Psychologist Kerry Botta Other Speech Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 0630/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q181 School Name: 181 Superintendent: Beverly Mitchell The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Marie Pyram ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both oral and written communication are the Home Language Survey(HLIS), Language of Preference for school forms, and Student Blue Emergency Cards, and RCPL ATS report. The HLIS survey is given to parents at registration. Part 3 of the survey asks the parents to indicate the language in which they would like to receive information from the school and the language preferred when communicating orally with staff members. The Language Preference form is given out to the parents during the Parent Orientation for ELL students within 10 days of registration. The School Emergency cards provide information about the home language and the preferred language for written and oral communication. For this school year the ENL teacher will create a report based on a parent survey and the RCPL ATS report for each class or grade, that will include information about the parents' languages. 2018-19 CEP 55  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Haitian -Creole French Spanish English Yes Yes Yes YES .72% .96% 2.63% 95.22% Yes Yes Yes YES 1.44% .72% 2.87% 94.26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school typically prepares translated versions of the brochure about the three different programs available to ELLs, placement , September 2017 DOE templates parent-teacher conference annouce-ments November 2017, January 2018,March, and May 2018 DOE templates ENL newsletters on the school website Monthly The Big word/In-house written translation Entitlement/non-entitlement letters, Throughout school year 2017-2018 DOE templates 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The face to face meetings our school has with parents throughout the 9/17/17 interpretation service(s)? In-house oral interpreter/DOE translated document templates 2018-19 CEP 56  school year include Meet the Teacher Night on Sept. 17 ELL Parent Conferences are to be held on November 5 and March 2. 11/5/17 and 3/2/18 Also, we have the Annual ELL Parent Meeting in January. January 2018 Pre K and K Orientation and Parent Workshops. In January 2018 January 2018 In-house Interpreter/Over the phone Interpretation(T&I) /the big word Inc. In-House Interpreter/Over the phone interpreter(T&I) In-House Interpreter 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of emergency...Bilingual Personnel in the school building will reach out to parents. Also, Over-the phone Interpretation(T&I) will be available to help speak to parents of limited English proficiency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, all school staff will watch webinar about the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, in a professional Learning session provided by ENL teacher. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per Chancellors Regulation A-663, At the beginning of the school year and throughout,Newcomer ELL Parents will receive a brochure about their Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities, and also attend a New Parent Information session in September 2017(available in different languages)about how to obtain Language Assistance Services. Also, Parents are informed that they can contact the parent coordinator or go on the DOE website(www.nycenet.edu/offices/translation) for Language Assistance Service.The welcome poster is placed at the front entrance of school building in the hallway. Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' guide to Language Access is also posted in the front entrance hallway and in the main office, the Parent Coordinator's office, and the ENL teacher's classroom. The language ID guide is posted at the security desk and the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 57  Our school will use the school survey to gather feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of services. Also the parent coordinator gives a parent survey at the beginning of the year. At the end of parent workshops, the parent coordinator asks for feedback. Also, at the end of each PTA meeting, parents are asked about any issues, concerns and ideas. Based on the feedback from the parents of limited English proficiency, steps are taken to address their ideas and concerns. 2018-19 CEP 58 
