2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q189 School Name: J.H.S. 189 DANIEL CARTER BEARD Principal: MAGDALEN RADOVICH 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Daniel Carter Beard Junior High School 25Q189 342500010189 6-8 School Number (DBN): 144-80 Barclay Avenue, Flushing, NY 11355 718 359 6676 Phone Number: 718 358 0155 Fax: Magdalen Radovich MRadovich2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Magdalen Radovich Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Gary Malone Amy Soler Adam Frank Rossibel Celedonio N//A Sunaina Rao, YMCA, 21st Century Schools Director (CSD) CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-40 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: ddimango@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 281 7605 Phone Number: FSC: QPN 718 281 7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 QPN, Long Island City, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Magdalen Radovich Gary Malone Amy Soler Rossibel Celedonio Sunaina Rao, YMCA, 21st Century Community Schools Grant Director (CSD) Adam Frank Vanessa Loccisano Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Teacher/Chairperson Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Diane Parada Jie Quan Jessica Lopez Fatima Wahid Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Parent/Co-Treasurer Parent/Co-Treasurer Parent/Secretary Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At Daniel Carter Beard JHS 189Q, our Mission is to provide all students with a learning environment in which their individual socio-emotional, academic, and high school preparation needs are met through personalized programs and targeted instruction. We are committed to supporting all of our students in the critical achievement of higher standards of advanced literacy analysis and mathematical proficiency, build 21st Century skills through our 2018-19 CEP 9  instructional technology initiative, and foster student creativity through instruction and exposure to the arts and music in our day and after school programs. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Daniel Carter Beard JHS 189Q is a 21st Century Community School located just outside culturally rich downtown Flushing. Our school reflects the shifting demographics of New York City and serves a diverse student body of approximately 775 students. Our students represent more than sixty cultures and nationalities (65.7% Asian, 27.4% Hispanic, 2.8% African-American and 2.9% White). Approximately 83% of our students come from a home where the primary language is other than English. The administration, faculty, and staff at JHS 189Q are committed to the belief that Success is the Only Option! for all students. Our programs prepare students for the academic and creative challenges of high school, college, and career pathways. We offer standards based core courses, honors and Regents level strands, arts and music opportunities that engage students in production and performance, introduction to instructional technology, and a new Dual Language Program in Mandarin. At JHS 189Q, we believe in educating the whole child. We integrate various socio-emotional learning models through our Guidance department designed to help individuals and groups of students to become healthy decision makers, to build character and self-esteem, and develop coping and conflict resolution skills that will support them in their middle school years and beyond. Our commitment to our students academic and socio emotional development extends beyond the end of the traditional school day. We offer students additional after school and Saturday academic support and tutoring programs, prep classes for SATs and Specialized High School and Regents, and a host a number of enrichment classes through our membership in the 21st Century Community Schools Grant Initiative. The Grant also provides funding for a variety of exciting clubs and sports activities. Included among these are cooking club, basketball, poetry, anime, and guitar club. The 21st Century Schools Grant also provides funding for family counseling services. All of our school community members are lifelong learners. Our faculty, staff, and adminsitrative team work collaboratively on a weekly basis in grade level and departmental Professional Learning teams to review student data, deepen knowledge and understanding of student developmental needs, and build on and create instructional practices that support the learning of all of our students. Parents and families are key members of our team at JHS 189Q in their roles on our School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association. Our Parent and Community Welcome Center and our Guidance Department offer parents and families individualized support on a daily basis. Our Parent Coordinator works collaboratively with the PTA, Guidance Department, and 21st Century Community Schools office to provide parents/guardians and families with workshops that address their needs and the needs of their children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 41% of our student population fall into the category of either Students with Disabilities or English Language Learners: Students with Disabilities: Approximately 14% of our students have IEPs. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our 2018-2019 Special Education program includes four sixth grade classes (two ICT and one 12:1 and one 12:1:1), four seventh grade classes (two ICT, a 12:1, and a 12:1:1); three eighth grade classes (two ICT and a 12:1:1); and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) to approximately 30 students. Students with IEPs are supported by ten full-time licensed Special Education teachers; ten paraprofessionals; one licensed Speech teacher; and a School-Based Support Team, each of whose members service students two to three days a week. English Language Learners: Approximately 27% Our 2018-2019 ENL Program provides integrated and stand alone classes as mandated by Part 154 regulations to support language acquisition and development. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths and Focus Areas in ELA: Of the total number of students that took the ELA State Exam in the 2017-18 school year, 462 out of the 687 students were Asians (67.2%) while 184 out of 687 students were Hispanics (26.8%). The two ethnicities account for 94% of our tested students. In ELA, our total percentage of students scoring at Proficiency Levels 3 & 4 went up by 3.9% compared to 2016-17 school year. The proficiency rate of our Asian subgroup population increased by 4%. This progress, however, is not consistent across subgroups. Proficiency for our Hispanic population only increased by 0.9% demonstrating a significant gap between Asian Proficiency (55%) and Hispanic Proficiency (33.7%). In addition,. while our overall ELL proficiency increased by 4.2%, it only reached 7.2% Proficiency. Strengths and Focus Areas in Math: Of the total number of students that took the Math State Exam in our school during the 2017-18 school year, 485 out of the 694 students were Asians (69.9%) while 170 out of 694 students were Hispanics (24.5%). The two subgroup populations account for 94.4% of our tested students. In Math, our total percentage of 3s & 4s increased by 7.8% compared to 2016-17 school year. Proficiency rates of our Asian population increased by 3.8% while our Hispanic population increased by 8.2%. However, the gap between Asian Proficiency (70.5%) and Hispanic Proficiency (27.6%) is 42.9% in favor of Asians. Overall ELL students increased by 43.1% and reached 46.1% Proficiency. Key Area of Focus: Increasing ELA and math proficiency across student populations with a specific targeted approach to providing additional classroom and after school supports to struggling learners with IEPs and in our ENL sub-populations. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q189 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 771 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 42 21 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 16 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 73.7% % Reduced Lunch 26.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 27.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.49 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 48.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 66 96.9% 2.7% 16.0% 3.0% 66.0% 0.5% 4 27% 8.5 55.0% 74% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths and Focus Areas in ELA: Of the total number of students that took the ELA State Exam in the 2017-18 school year, 462 out of the 687 students were Asians (67.2%) while 184 out of 687 students were Hispanics (26.8%). The two ethnicities account for 94% of our tested students. In ELA, our total percentage of students scoring at Proficiency Levels 3 & 4 went up by 3.9% compared to 2016-17 school year. The proficiency rate of our Asian subgroup population increased by 4%. This progress, however, is not consistent across subgroups. Proficiency for our Hispanic population only increased by 0.9% demonstrating a significant gap between Asian Proficiency (55%) and Hispanic Proficiency (33.7%). In addition,. while our overall ELL proficiency increased by 4.2%, it only reached 7.2% Proficiency. Strengths and Focus Areas in Math: Of the total number of students that took the Math State Exam in our school during the 2017-18 school year, 485 out of the 694 students were Asians (69.9%) while 170 out of 694 students were Hispanics (24.5%). The two subgroup populations account for 94.4% of our tested students. In Math, our total percentage of 3s & 4s increased by 7.8% compared to 2016-17 school year. Proficiency rates of our Asian population increased by 3.8% while our Hispanic population increased by 8.2%. However, the gap between Asian Proficiency (70.5%) and Hispanic Proficiency (27.6%) is 42.9% in favor of Asians. Overall ELL students increased by 43.1% and reached 46.1% Proficiency. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, we will build teacher capacity in analyzing and using student data to plan and deliver targeted literacy and numeracy instruction designed to increase the number of students participating in and attaining proficiency on the NYS Math and ELA exams with a focus on identified at risk sub populations by 2%. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Reading Data Analysis All Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal Conduct an analysis of quantitative and qualitative reading data culled from the New York State English Exam, the NYSESLAT, and the Star Assessment in ELA with the purpose of identifying specific struggling students across subgroups and addressing their reading instruction needs through individual and small group learning goal planning; Conduct Action Research study with a control group of 20 ELL students from the Expanding subgroup Provide extended day academic intervention services for struggling students through our new RISE Academy in collaboration with our 21st Century Community Schools partner. all 6-8 graders with a focus on ELLs in Expanding subgroup APs TCP coaches All 6-8 grade students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal APs TCP coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and Common Core for purposes of parent at home support of students in the following ways:  Monthly review of CEP Goals and Action Plan implementation with School Leadership Team  PTA workshops on STAR Assessment and reading strategies in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator  Monthly informational newsletter providing parents with overview of current data assessment, STAR Assessment tool and findings  Monthly Progress reports for identified subgroup students and students attending extended day sessions Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources include: Assistant Principals TCP teacher coaches Parent Coordinator Principal Teachers Instructional Resources: STAR Assessment CCLS/New Generation Reading Standards Professional Development resources by District vendors including Jennifer Serravallo and Marianne Cucchiara Schedule Adjustments: Professional development and planning will occur during Monday and Tuesday extended hours for teachers as well as through per session hours during the week and/or Saturdays as determined by team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Ongoing Benchmark Assessment for SY 2018-2019: Baseline data from New York State English Language Arts exams, NYSESLAT, Spring Instructional Reports, and the Renaissance STAR assessment will be collected and reviewed by JHS 189 Administration, Coaches, and teacher teams three times per year over the 2017-2019 school years in September/October, February, and June to monitor school progress toward meeting our goal and to drive revision of the plan and instructional/program interventions in alignment with the information derived from the data. Specific Benchmark Assessment for 2018-2019: By February 2019: 2018-19 CEP 17  1. Assistant Principals, Principals, and Coaches will conduct instructional walkthroughs to monitor and support teachers engaging in professional work around reading strategies resulting in 100% of teachers in the pilot group integrating the strategies in their daily. 2. We will also measure our school's progress toward meeting this goal by analyzing the results of the mid year STAR assessments in ELA to determine growth trends as well as priority areas for improvement of all students as well as identified subgroups. Additionally, we will review student work presented during inquiry meetings and data collected in formal observations to assess the implementation of quality oral and written feedback to determine the success/impact of our professional development sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Renaissance Star Assessment in Reading New York State English Language Arts exam NYSESLAT Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Attendance data for 2018-2019: JHS 189 has a consistently high attendance rate of approximately 98% daily. Systems that support this attendance rate include analysis of first period attendance by a staff member, daily phone calls to the homes of students that are absent, weekly analysis of attendance trends with Principal, guidance staff, and Assistant Principals. Ongoing communication is maintained with the school’s attendance teacher from Queens North. In addition, we will be working with our Community Schools Director this year to identify possible trends in absenteeism as well as in tardiness. Additional data over the past year from OORs indicates a rise in self-harm and suicide ideation cases at JHS 189. In collaboration with Donna Brailsford and Peter McHugh from the Queens North Office of School Climate, we are integrating Suicide Awareness workshops into our professional development offerings at JHS 189 and have hosted the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) workshops at our school. Key members of our team, including the Principal, Assistant Principal, Dean, School Counselors, and teachers attend TCIP and Leveraging Socio Emotional Growth through Data sessions and turn keying information and strategies to full faculty. Source B: Spring 2018 ScholarCentric SocioEmotional Resiliency Survey 6th-8th Grade In 2017-2018, we administered the ScholarCentric Resiliency Socioemotional Risk Factor Survey for the first time to 6th and 7th graders. Data indicated Overall Indicator Risk Factor Area Overall Percentages based on 500 6th-7th Graders Confidence Connections Motivation Stress Well Being Education 38% 35% 33% 31% 26% 24% Preliminary results indicated two areas of socioemotional focus: Confidence and Connections. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 19  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will foster whole school supportive environment rooted in our charter theme RISE (Relationship - Inspiration - Scholarship - Engagement) through implementation of actionable, timely, specific, and data driven classroom strategies, protocols, and personalized learning models, and additonal socio-emotional and academic support through our after school and Saturday RISE Academy in collaboration with our 21st Century Community Schools partners resulting in a 2% reduction in level 3, 4, and 5 infractions. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals TCP Coaches Using Data Driven Actionable Feedback to Support Student Learning Objectives All Teachers As part of our Data Inquiry Professional Learning Cycles, teachers will receive professional development in how to create and assess formative assessment measures in lesson and unit planning and implementation; to provide students with timely, actionable feedback and next steps; individual and small group conferencing models through CARP and support from a consultant from Queens North. Two action research cycles of Individual and Teacher Team Coaching Sessions on how to use formative and summative data to create lessons which embed multiple entry points, differentiated content, texts, instructional strategies, and assessments based on classroom and standardized exam data for support of at risk learners in the General Education classes, ELL students, and Students with Disabilities. Resiliency Survey and Training All Teachers October Principal JHS 189 administered the Scholarcentric Socioemotional Resiliency Survey We will convene a resiliency training committee to support next steps which will include: 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors  analysis and disaggregation of data by sub groups;  identification of major trends across the student body as well as individual and subgroup trends; creation of an action plan for helping teachers to utilize the findings of the data to support individual and small groups of students in their classrooms and in individual student goal setting, conferencing and interventions; sharing information with parents on an individual family level with the support of our guidance team which has received Restorative Justice training over the past year; creation, administration, and analysis of school designed midpoint climate survey for students to be given in February 2019; creation, administration, and analysis of school designed midpoint professional development survey for teachers to be given in February 2019     2018-19 CEP 21   working with the 21st Century Community Schools Director, guidance counselors, and Queens North mental health support team to partner with appropriate outside agencies. Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools(TCIS) Training JHS 189 will continue to host a training sessions with the Queens North Social Climate support team for four full day sessions. A select cohort of JHS 189 staff members will participate in the training sessions. The goal is for them to learn how to proactively prevent and/or de-escalate potential crisis situations with students; process the crisis event with students to help build and strengthen their coping strategies; and manage crisis situations to reduce the risk of harm to students and staff. Pilot Cohort of JHS 189 Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Dean Guidance Counselors School Psychologists Queens North support staff Principal Assistant Principals Dean Guidance Counselors School Psychologists Queens North support staff Monthly teacher workshops on topics including: All Teachers/Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 1. Helping students build resiliency and coping skills when faced with challenges inside and outside of the classroom; 2. Distinguishing between normal student behaviors that distract from learning in the classroom from signs of student at risk behaviors including suicide ideation, drug use, bullying, and physical/emotional abuse. Student Self Esteem Programs Female teachers will participate in the Beautiful Me workshops geared toward the building of self esteem in girls. The involvement of specific teachers in these workshops is also designed to provide a genuine learning experience which will enable participating teachers to better October 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Dean Female teachers Female students 2018-19 CEP 22  relate to the emotional needs of their students and to turnkey training to their colleagues. Selected male teachers will participate in the RAISE (Reduce Aggression Increase Self Empowerment) workshops designed to provide boys with the opportunity to communicate, explore, and reflect on healthy relationships. The involvement of specific teachers in these workshops is also designed to enable participating teachers to relate more fully to the emotional needs of male students and to turnkey training to their colleagues Guidance Counselors School Psychologists Principal Assistant Principals Pilot group of male teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Male students Dean Guidance Counselors School Psychologists Principal Assistant Principal Dean School Safety Agents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Increased Leadership Presence All Students Research shows that positive, ongoing, predictable interactions with adults in school, as well as at home, increases students’ sense of well being and connectedness: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/protective/pdf/connectedness.pdf - Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. School Connectedness: Strategies for Increasing Protective Factors Among Youth. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2009. One of the structures that we have strengthened this past year and will continue to build upon is increased Principal and Assistant Principal presence in the main lobby, cafeteria and outside the building: Morning: Principal (or Assistant Principal as needed due to Principal’s schedule for meetings outside building) greet students at entry. Lunch Periods: The Principal and two Assistant Principals cover three lunch periods during which they spend “social time” with students. Afternoon Dismissal: The Principal and two Assistant Principals join School Safety Agents in the lobby and outside the building to ensure safe and orderly dismissal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment Goal for purposes of parent at home support of students in the following ways:  Review and analysis of data from 2016-2017 Quality Guide Survey and ScholarCentric Resiliency Survey with School Leadership Team and PTA for purposes of next step planning, implementation, and monitoring.  Presentation of data and plan at November Parent Teacher night through small group information sessions held throughout the day and evening Inclusion of updated resources list for parents in monthly informational newsletter   Parent workshops on topic including helping teens cope with stress, recognizing signs of depression, self harm, and bullying, and outside resources and support services available to all families, designed and implemented in collaboration with the 21st Century Community Schools Director, PTA, Parent Coordinator, and Queens North facilitators. School designed Parent Resiliency survey mirroring the Student Resiliency Survey.  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Guidance Counselors, School Psychologists, Parent Coordinator, Queens North staff, outside professional development agencies Instructional Resource: ScholarCentric Resiliency Survey https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/protective/pdf/connectedness.pdf - Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. School Connectedness: Strategies for Increasing Protective Factors Among Youth. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2009. Schedule Adjustments: SLT and PTA meetings, Monday/Tuesday after-school extended hours sessions for faculty Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 24  Ongoing Benchmark Assessment for SY2018-2019: JHS 189 Administration, Coaches, and teacher teams will review baseline data from OORs monthly reports, the ScholarCentric Socioemotional Resiliency Survey in November 2018 and May 2019, and the NYC School Quality Guide at the end of SY 2019 by JHS administrative, teacher, and parent teams to monitor school progress toward meeting our Supportive Environment goal. In February 2019 we will measure our school's progress toward meeting this goal by analyzing the results of the mid year STAR assessments in ELA. Additionally, we will review student work presented during inquiry meetings and data collected in formal observations to assess the implementation of quality oral and written feedback to determine the success/impact of our professional development sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS ELA Assessment Student Work Feeback samples Formal Observation Reports In addition, we will conduct a midpoint school climate survey designed, administered, and analyzed by school Resiliency Team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Relative to Collaborative Teacher Indicator Based on the 2015-2016 Quality Review, “All teacher teams are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations that support the goals of the school and strengthen instructional capacity.” The School received a Well-Developed in Indicator 4.2 Teacher teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice.” In addition, there are several embedded programs/structures in place that provide opportunity for collaboration and professional growth. These include:  Collaborative, interdisciplinary grade level teacher teams  Coaching provided by APs and teacher Teacher Career Pathway (TCP) coaches based on data from formal/informal observations, review of student work, and areas of need identified by individual teachers as part of their own professional development  new extended day opportunities for struggling students through tutoring and homework classes provided by the 21st Century Community Schools grant  Cultural partnerships that specifically serve our ELLs include collaboration with teaching artists affiliated with Arts Connection and Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts. Priority Needs Relative to Collaborative Teacher Indicator Priority Need Area: Of the 687 students that took the ELA State Exam in the 2017-18 school year, 184 were Hispanics (26.8%). Proficiency for our Hispanic population only increased by 0.9% demonstrating a significant gap between Asian Proficiency (55%) and Hispanic Proficiency (33.7%). Of the total number of students that took the Math State Exam in our school during the 2017-18 school year, 170 out of 694 students were Hispanics (24.5%). While our total Level 3 and 4 proficiency reate increased by 7.8% compared to 2016-17 school year, there is a stark 42.9% achievement gap between our Hispanic sub population and our Asian sub population in favor of the latter. Key Area of Focus: Increasing ELA and math proficiency across student populations with a specific targeted approach to providing additional classroom and after school supports to at risk and struggling learners with IEPs and in our ENL sub-populations. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will engage in professional learning and inquiry cycles that support the use of multiple forms of formative and summative performance data and research based strategies to improve literacy and mathematics instruction with support of CARP and Algebra for All professional learning sessions as evidenced in lesson plans, formal ADVANCE observation reports, and Instructional Walkthrough logs. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional learning opportunities for teachers on how to create evidence based, personalized reading objectives and strategies for individuals and small groups Provide teachers with professional development on targeted small group reading strategies designed to support below grade level readers across identified sub groups in a rotation of pilot ELA classes; ie, engaging students in developing their own reading goals based on work by Jennifer Seravallo and deconstruction and reconstruction of text strategies presented by Maryann Cucchiara to improve the reading, writing, and speaking skills of English Language Learners Provide teachers working in collaborative partner models ( ICT; ENL co-teachers) with targeted professional development in how to create differentiated lesson plans that support scaffolded reading and writing from sources strategies Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal All Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal TCP Coaches Principal Assistant Principal TCP Coaches Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Coaches Special Education and ENL teachers BSFC workshop leaders ) Principal Assistant Principal TCP Coaches Teachers will conduct inter-visitations/debriefs/collaboration based on professional learning focus areas with TCP team and other colleagues across the disciplines. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 28  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Several ways in which we will work to promote teacher-parent collaboration this year will include: Two workshops designed by the Reading Committee to support families in their understanding of how to work with students on developing their reading skills at home through use of several strategies adapted from Maryann Cucchiara’s work. A family reading survey for students to complete with their families in November 2018. A Winter Book Fair in collaboration with the PTA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: BSFC Workshop Providers Instructional Resources: Books by Maryanne Cucchiara and Jennifer Seravallo Reading Surveys for students, families, staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see increased evidence of research based reading strategies reflected in lesson plans across disciplines, formal ADVANCE observation reports, and Instructional Walkthroughs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. . ADVANCE Observation and Walkthrough Reports Family Reading Survey results Attendance sheets from the first Reading panel event and Book Fair STAR Reading Assessment 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Relative to Effective School Leadership The Principal and the school’s two Assistant Principals are currently engaged in an in depth analysis of multiple academic data sources, socioeconomic indicators, attendance and discipline trends; a recalibration of Advance observations norms through bi-monthly support visits with the District TDEC; assessment of Special Education programming, student IEPs, and classroom practices and programming of ELL students to ensure mandated services are in place; review of Core course Scopes and Sequences alignment with Common Core Learning Standards across grade level; in collaboration with District 25 Field Support. Current participation in the Teachers Coaching Pathways program provides additional peer support for teachers. There is a strong commitment to shared leadership practices evidenced by new teacher initiated sub teams established to support the Principal in creating new systems and structure that support a school vision based on the premise that Success is the Only Option for all students and adult learners. Priority Area Relative to Effective School Leadership According to the 2016-2017 CEP for JHS 189, the actionable written feedback to teachers was identified as a priority area based on the previous year’s ADVANCE End of Year Teacher Survey in which teachers cited a lack of actionable written feedback as an area for improvement on part of the school leadership. In addition, the 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Guide Report shows that only 76% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the school leader participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Principal will implement a system and structure that provide all teachers across discipline areas with timely and targeted actionable feedback through formal post observation sessions and monthly coaching sessions designed to support professional learning around targeted areas resulting in lessons that reflect intentional data driven planning as evidenced in classroom observations and pre- and post - observation lesson review. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal and two Assistant Principals have established a year long professional development plan in collaboration with the District 25 TDEC to calibrate and norm on teacher practice and ADVANCE observation process in order to provide teachers with specific, actionable feedback, and next steps aligned with the Framework for Teaching. The JHS 189 Professional Development team will design and implement year long 4 week professional learning cycles led by the Principal and Assistant Principals in collaboration with the TCP coaches, and colleagues. The cycles will be designed to address the academic and socioemotional priority areas identified in the 2018-2019 CEP goals. All Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals District 25 TDEC All Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals TCP Coaches The first cycle focuses on utilizing the indicators in the Danielson Rubric in lesson and unit planning. Upcoming cycles will focus on instructional reading strategies, formative assessment and actionable feedback, instructional technology. Principal and Assistant Principals will provide teachers with monthly coaching to support professional learning around collaboratively determined instructional areas through individualized goal and action plans and relevant professional development. All Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals TCP Coaches Principal Assistant Principals TCP Coaches TCP teacher coaches will provide peer coaching and demonstrate lessons of best practices within their classrooms. In addition, they will support administrators feedback to teachers. All Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 33  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In an effort to promote parent understanding of the school’s objectives regarding student work, parent meetings, conducted by our Parent Coordinator and faculty/administrators will include an additional focus on strategies families can take at home to support our reading and writing goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders will use their scheduled TCP periods to conducted inter-visitations and debrief meetings with colleagues to discuss best instructional practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Principal will conduct weekly Advance meetings with the Assistant Principals to review current observation schedules and reports to identify trends and areas for need of additonal support. She will also facilitate monthly meetings with the District 25 TDEC to engage in norming activities designed to align the feedback provided to teachers following classroom observations. Resources available through Advance and through WeTeachNYC will be utilized to support this work. In February 2019, the Principal will conduct a comparative review of Advance observation reports and coaching logs based on data from 2017-2018 and 2018-2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data sources include Advance observation reports and coaching logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Relative to the Strong Family and Community Ties Element: Priority Areas Relative to the Strong Family and Community Ties Element: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in partnership with our 21st Century Community Schools partner, the YMCA, we will increase the accessibility of professional opportunities for parents/guardians through flexible scheduling of PTA meetings and Community Schools Forums to accommodate parents'/guardians' work schedules and Saturday classes and workshops 2018-19 CEP 35  for parents/guardians including ESL, basic computer use, immigration issues, and social media as evidenced by agendas, workshop presentations and sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). JHS 189, in collaboration with the PTA, SLT, and 21st Century Community Schools Director, will increase the number of parent and community engagement opportunities which will include two Family Fun evening events, extended day/Saturday classes for parents/guardians and their children on appropriate technology use and language skills development, a Spring Semester cooking class and a cooking class resulting in a 10% increase in the number of parents responding positively to questions on the NYC School Survey regarding opportunities to participate in meaningful school activities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Parents October 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Community Schools Director Parent Coordinator All teachers will be given access codes for parents to help facilitate their usage of Skedula at all parent-teacher conferences. Parents/ Guardians Parents will be offered technology-based workshops, including information sessions on Skedula. In addition, specially translated material designed to inform and encourage parents of ELLs to access student data on a regular basis. Parents of Students with Disabilities will be invited to attend a workshop with their child in order to provide them with an opportunity to gain an understanding of the importance of using the Pupilpath/Skedula system to monitor their child's academic progress. Parents/ Guardians Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Community Schools Director Parent Coordinator Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Community Schools Director Parent Coordinator Plan an evening event that will showcase student artwork. Select parents will be encouraged to participate in the art show by volunteering and/or attending a “Paint Night” station at this event. Additionally, several positions will be created to allow for parents to volunteer to help out at this event. Parents/ Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Guardians Assistant Principals Community Schools Director Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 37 Teachers will be provided with professional development in how to provide warm and cool feedback to parents in constructive ways. Parents/ Guardians Sept 20178 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Community Schools Director Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. JHS 189 is partnered with the YMCA through the 21st Century Community Schools initiative. This grant provides funding for expanded academic intervention services for students and enrichment activities as well teacher professional learning and parent/guardian and family support programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, TCP teachers and other community resources through the 21st Century Community Schools Grant will serve to provide parents and families with additional resources via workshops and other venues including but not limited to school wide projects and other student events and activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, data collected from a school made parent survey will reflect an improvement in the communication between staff and parents as evidenced by 85% responses that are categorized as positive. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance taken at at parent workshops in the 2018-2019 school year will be compared to those taken during the 2017-2018 school year. Data reports extracted from Skedula will also be used to assess the number of parents that access this online tool as well as how often they access it. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Standardized test Scores/Teacher Assessments Renaissance Star Reading Assessment Standardized test Scores/Teacher Assessments Renaissance Star Reading and Math Assessment Standardized test Scores/Teacher Assessments Renaissance Star Reading Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Supplemental TutoringNational Junior Honors SocietyPeer Tutoring Tutoring provided by JHS 189 teachers through the 21st Century Community Schools Grant Supplemental TutoringNational Junior Honors SocietyPeer Tutoring Tutoring provided by JHS 189 teachers through the 21st Century Community Schools Grant Supplemental TutoringNational Junior Honors SocietyPeer Tutoring Tutoring provided by JHS 189 teachers through the 21st Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group and One-to-One tutoring After school Wednesdays through Friday Small Group and One-to-One tutoring After school Wednesdays through Friday Small group One-to-one tutoring After school Wednesdays through Friday 2018-19 CEP 39 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Standardized test Scores/Teacher Assessments Renaissance Star Reading Assessment Standardized test Scores/Teacher Assessments Century Community Schools Grant Supplemental TutoringNational Junior Honors SocietyPeer Tutoring Tutoring provided by JHS 189 teachers through the 21st Century Community Schools Grant L. Kahl, G.C., Mizutani, G.C., SuHong Chen, S.P., B. Crawford, S.W. Renaissance Star Reading Assessment Small Group and One-to-One tutoring After school Wednesdays through Friday Small Group and One-to-One tutoring During The Day 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have three students living in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The Principal holds initial and follow up meetings with the family to determine how their needs that can be best met by the school. This includes providing school supplies, school uniform, tutoring, and after school activities through Beacon and the 21st Century Community Schools Grant. In addition, students in Temporary Housing will receive support from Guidance Counselors and School Social Workers to ensure transition. The new Principal is currently working with Field Support from the Office of School Climate to determine additional socio-emotional and academic support systems to put in place this year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I School. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  We are a Title I school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school. 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. New teacher recruitment is done through consultation with the District 25 Human Resources coordinator, New Teacher Finder searches, Teacher Recruitment events, outreach to university teacher education programs, and requests for recommendations from principals at other schools. New teachers are paired with veteran teachers for mentoring upon hiring and will receive professional development and support with their mentor teachers in collaboration with the Field Support coordinator for the building. Focus of the coaching is determined in collaboration with the teachers. Additional support is provided by the TCP teachers in alignment with the professional plan created by the Principal and new teacher. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). TCP teachers work with the school's Professional Learning team to develop professional development opportunities for all teachers and staff in alignment with the school's academic and socio-emotional focus. This year the primary focus is on strategies to support struggling readers, specifically those amongst our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, utilizing the work of Maryann Cuchiarra and Jennifer Serravallo. Model Teachers open their classrooms as labs for colleagues to visit and discuss strategies staff members can bring back to their own classrooms. Our ENL and Special Education departments will also be conducting PDs this year to keep our staff current with new teaching practices and strategies to address our student population. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 43  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Based on findings and discussions with supervisors, decisions are made for modifications when necessary. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 CEP 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 22222 22222 22222 8600.00 22222 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 45   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. JHS 189Q, Daniel Carter Beard Junior High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students JHS 189Q, Daniel Carter Beard Junior High School , will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) JHS 189Q, Daniel Carter Beard Junior High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 49  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards/New Generation Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 51  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? In September 2017, JHS 189Q and the YMCA of Greater New York partnered in NYC's 21st Century Community Schools initiative for its first year of implementation of a five year grant. Our initial programs included after school academic intervention core classes staffed by JHS 189Q teachers, cooking classes through Keys to Abundant Life, Stop Motion Arts workshop, and SH/SAT Prep classes provided by Ivy Keys as well as a lunch time games program. The grant also funded one full time social worker who partnered with JHS 189Q's guidance staff to provide individual and small group intervention and socioemotional support for our students. In addition, she supervised a young women's support group during after school hours and participated in JHS 189Q's Pride Ambassadors program. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Community School's initiative will provide approximately 250 students with quality academic intervention in all four core areas as well as in English language acquisition and greater opportunities for enrichment and socioemotional developmental support. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Based on 2017-2018 standardized data, our ELL students are not showing significant progress in ELA and Math and JHS 189Q has seen a spike in Level 3-5 infractions. Achieving our Community School Goal will support our academic goals for students by contributing to a 3% increase of ELL performance on standardized ELA and math exams and a 3% decrease in Level 3-5 infractions. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership YMCA of Greater New York Target Population All students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal To serve a minimum of 250 students throughout the By June 2019, the Community School's initiative will provide approximately 250 2018-19 CEP 54  academic school year by providing high quality academic, enrichment, and socio-emotional programs that support JHS 189Q school goals. students with quality academic intervention in all four core areas as well as in English language acquisition and greater opportunities for enrichment and socio-emotional developmental support. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Community Schools Director, Principal, Assistant Principal, School Counselors, Social Worker and 2 social work interns, general admin, JHS 189Q faculty, and vendors Instructional Resources: Laptop Computers, Triumph Boards, Peer Mediation curriculum, curriculum provided by Follow Us to Success test prep vendor, additional YMCA professional development providers Schedule Adjustments: Overlap of staff to provide day school support as well as after school support. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2018-19 CEP 55  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The School Community Director is a key member of the jHS 189Q administrative cabinet. She works weekly with the Principal and her Assistant Principals and other school based staff to review multiple data sources on a consistent basis including weekly attendance percentages and attendance Heat Map tracker, marking period report card grades, and the results of 21st Century DOE/Grant evaluations, program and budget planning, implementation and assessment. 2. JHS 189 is committed to taking a data-driven approach to the upcomign school year. We will use the New Visions Data Sorter to inform our attendance structures, work closely with the guidance team to identify students or families in need of services from our Social Worker, review intervention data from the previous year to inform the creation of new structures within the school, and work with both YMCA and JHS 189 staff to build programming that compliments the academic and SEL needs of students at our school. In 2018-2019 we will be providing more push-in interventions during the school day while also providing more outlets for expression and academic intervention in the after school space. In addition, we will provide a safe space for youth before school by expanding morning sports programs. Though our partnership we will work to increase SEL supports for students during the rigors of the school day and increase academic support that aligns with students’ classroom experience in after school programs. 3. In the 2018-2019 year, JHS 189 will partner with the YMCA and Flushing International High School to provide Saturday programming for families. In addition to CSTs and the Community School Forums which give parents a chance to express their ideas and have their voice heard within the school, the Saturday programming with serve both the academic and SEL needs of families as a whole. While students attend test prep and academic intervention courses, parents will attend practical ESOL workshops followed by workshops centered on critical topics like housing rights and immigration issues. By offering these programs at a different time than CST, SLT, or PTA meetings, we tap into a different group of families, and by providing support for both parents and kids we ensure that we enrich and welcome the whole family into the school. 4. In the 2017-2018 school year, the Community School Director, the JHS 189 Principal, the Assistant Principals, and the School Guidance Team worked to create a culture that used data to drive decisions within the school. With the introduction of the New Visions Data Sorter, this team has been able to identify a strong group of candidates for academic and attendance interventions in the 2018-2019 year. In addition, weekly Administrative Cabinet and Attendance Team meetings will continue to be supported both with data collected from the New Visions Data Sorter, 21st Century surveys and evaluations, ATS data, and other evaluations the school has done to assess the SEL needs of its students. In addition, the school will be working closely with the Community School Director in working to decrease the number of Level 3 interventions at the school and using data to increase staff presence or enrichment programming in a way that strategically tackles issues as they arise. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Our specific academic goals for students in the 2018-2019 school year targets perceived deficits in specific areas of reading, writing, and mathematics. The linchpin of our extended school day program is the use of our own teachers as ESD providers. The close link between what happens in the classroom and the support given afterschool strengthens the effectiveness of the ELT to reach its learning objectives that are consistent with our overall school objectives. . Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The school will utilize both it’s own internal structure and the supports of the YMCA in order to implement the program. Human Resource support will be given by the Flushing YMCA and the Community School director. Instructional Resources will come from curriculum purchased by the YMCA(Peer Mediation, CATCH exercise curriculum, SEL Curriclum) and the expertise of the JHS staff hired to run these programs. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The JHS 189 Community School Program will launch on September 12, 2018 and end on June 28, 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction component of this plan will consist of 2 classes described below: A. ESL for Newcomers: This class will target students entering the NYC school system for the first time and who are NYSELA exempt. The students selected for this program all scored in the entering range on the NYSITELL. Due to the recent Part 154 changes, these students no longer receive 8 stand alone ESL classes. This intense ESL class, presented in English, is designed to acculturate students, while preparing them for academic success. Students at the entering level in grades 6, 7, and 8 will attend a one hour session taught by an instructor that is TESOL certified. Grades 7 & 8 will attend a class on Wednesdays from 2:30pm-3:30pm and Grade 6 will attend a class on Thursdays from 2:30pm-3:30pm. The program will begin in October 2018 and classes will continue to meet weekly through March 2019. The instructor will utilize Rosetta Stone software which is designed to help students develop language and the basic building blocks of literacy. These materials are specifically designed for use in this stand alone newcomer program and are not used in our daily instruction. B. ESL for Long Term ELLs: This class will target students in Grades 6, 7, and 8 who showed little growth on the 2018 NYSESLAT. Select students in grades 6, 7, and 8 will attend a one hour session with a TESOL certified instructor that is also trained in utilizing Read 180 program. . Grade 6 students will attend classes on Thursdays and Fridays from 2:30pm-3:30pm, Grade 7 will attend classes on Wednesdays and Fridays from 2:30pm-3:30pm, and Grade 8 will attend classes on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30pm-3:30pm. The program will begin in October 2018 and classes will continue to meet weekly through March 2019. The instructors will use Read 180 software which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and include grade level appropriate content and skills practice that are simplified and scaffolded so that all students can grasp the material. These materials are supplemental and not used in our daily instruction. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to address the L2 stall in ELLs, there is a need to provide both language and literacy support for our ELLs. Beginning in October 2018, all teachers involved in the Title III program will meet 2-3 times during the week immediately following the after school program on either a Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday for a total of 90 minutes to engage in professional conversation and lesson planning. Staff members that have been trained in Rosetta Stone and Read 180 will act as facilitators in training their colleagues. This team will be led by one administrator who will be responsible for creating agendas around and keeping accurate attendance of these professional meetings. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: District-wide, engaging parents has become a priority for schools, including for JHS 189Q. To further reach parents, especially the parents of our ELLs, we plan to offer four additional workshops that will take place in the evenings from 5:00pm-6:00pm. A parent outreach effort will be undertaken. These workshops will be presented by a certified TESOL teacher and will include topics such as "Ways of increasing literacy at home", "How to prepare for NYS assessments", and a "Skedula 101 for parents". Parents will be notified of these workshops by receiving a translated flyer written in English, Chinese, Spanish, and Korean in addition to a translated phone message via school messenger. Adult translators will provide additional language support for parents attending this workshops. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 21.070 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Daniel Carter Beard Junior High School Borough Queens School Number 189 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Magdalen Radovich Coach Efrosini Daskalopolous ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dorina Sferrazza Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Bugay/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Erica Wahba/Science Related-Service Provider Laura Scicutella/Speech Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Denise Healey Coach Diane Parada School Counselor Lindsay KahlChia Mizutani Parent Rossibel Celedonio Parent Coordinator Christine Colligan Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Vasillou Rozos Other (Name and Title) George Fitting, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 62  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 802 Total number of ELLs 266 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.17% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We will be using the STAR ELA and Math Assessments, Read 180 and teacher created assessments. During ELA classes, teachers will choose to focus on high frequency words that appear in texts that are part of the ELA curriculum. For students who are struggling in the three higher domains (vocabulary, and comprehension in literature and informational texts), ENL teachers provide scaffolded texts (using the chunking scaffold outlined by Aida Walqui and recommended by DELLSS) to help students access higher level texts. In addition we will be exploring additional formative assessment programs such as Achieve 3000 and Fountas and Pinnell, and the ELL Periodic Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELA, ESL and math teachers will receive regular PD by the AP for ENL and the three model teachers on using to assess student growth and to use the data to plan for differentiated instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our instructional program for ELLs on a quarterly basis and address instructional and programming needs as determined by our findings. We examine how the students are doing in their subject classes through analysis of the NYSESLAT exam. We will explore using the ELL Periodic Assessment for the Fall and Spring. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL Teachers will analyze the current NYSESLAT periodic assessment data and share the results with content area teachers for instructional planning purposes. ENL teachers will work with content area teachers to develop interventions that are appropriate for students in each content area. Professional development sessions will be developed by the AP and ENL Coordinator to support content area teachers in using the data to inform instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable for grades 6-8 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2017 NYSESLAT shows that the majority of our 7th grade ELLs scored ... The majority of the 8th grade ELLs scored at ... Our students who score at the Expanding level, generally reach the required score for Commanding in reading and speaking; however, their scores are lower in the listening and writing modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The AP for ENL will be responsible for sharing the findings during professional development sessionsthroughout the school year. NYSESLAT scores will be shared via Google Sheets, which allows all content area teachers to access their students English proficiency levels. ENL teachers will distribute NYSED score reports to all students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs are integrated in the general education program. They receive ENL services during heterogeneous (Entering and Emerging + non-ELLs and Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding + non-ELLs) content area classes using the Integrated Co-Teaching model. The Entering and Emerging students receive additional instruction four periods per week during a stand-alone ENL program as per CR Part 154.2 regulations. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services during ELA following the Integrated Co-Teaching model and 180 minutes per week of ENL services following the stand-alone ENL model from certified ENL teachers. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services during ELA following the the Integrated Co-Teaching model from an ENL certified teacher. All Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs also receive an additional 180 minutes per week of ELA instruction from an ELA certified teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, ELLs are scheduled for at least eight periods of mathematics per week; five periods of social studies per week; five periods of science in grades 6 and 7, six periods of science in grade 8, two periods of physical education per week, one period of health education and one period of social action per week. Core content is taught in English, using ENL strategies by fully certified subject specialists. ENL strategies include scaffolding, use of concrete materials, visuals (graphic organizers, pictures), questioning strategies that foster student learning of the subject as well as English, use of controlled vocabulary as well as the development of academic English across subject areas. Students are required to come to school with bilingual dictionaries. Longmann dictionaries are also available in all classrooms. Specific textbooks in social studies and science have been selected because of their controlled vocabulary and visuals. All classrooms have levelled libraries. Teachers provide additional materials from various computer sites. Students use laptops for research for exit projects in social studies and science. Document cameras are used in classes, especially mathematics, to share students work. Triumph boards, installed in all classrooms, permit teachers access to a variety of interactive curriculum materials. Moreover, additional English literacy instruction is offered for three or four periods per week. In order to support our instructional program for English language learners, subject specialists have received and will continue to receive professional development with regard to ENL strategies and differentiated instruction in order to make the content comprehensible for English Language Learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newcomer Spanish-speaking ELLs take the Spanish LAB when they enroll. ELLs take the NYS Math and Science tests in their native language, if they are available. Oral translations are offered to students who can benefit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In order to ensure that all ELLs are being challenged and supported academically, we provide the following opportunities for ELL subgroups: SIFE : Access to Title III programs after school and peer tutoring opportunities through JHS189 Arista Peer Tutoring program. Newcomers: of our ELLs, are grouped by level and grade for ENL instruction. ENL specialists help them acclimate to their new country, community and school. Moreover, in order to assist ELLs in preparing for the New York State English Language Arts Test they are required to take after one year, they receive additional periods of literacy. Newcomers are also invited to participate in Title III programs that take place after school. Developing: are grouped by level and grade for ENL instruction. They work with the ENL specialists on the updated Scholastic Read-180 program which is aligned with the common core curriculum as well as the new NYSESLAT. 2018-19 CEP 65  Long Term ELLs: are primarily students who have an IEP or are being tested for special education services. As the number of special education students in our school has increased, there has been a corresponding increase in long term ELLs. ENL specialists work collaboratively with special education staff. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: ENL certified teachers provide Integrated Co-Teaching services during content area classes and they are the point of contact for teachers who have concerns regarding these students. These students are also placed in Regents or SP classes if they show potential and ability to perform at the required levels for those classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs receive all mandates identified in the IEP, in addition to ENL instruction. ELL-SWDs are scheduled into the appropriate special education program (SETSS, ICT, 12:1:1/12:1, speech) according to their IEP. They are taught by fully licensed special education teachers who are departmentalized. In addition, students are scheduled for ENL by grade and proficiency level based on their NYSESLAT score and taught by fully certified ENL teachers. Where appropriate, an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the student's home language attends the ENL class with the student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are scheduled for ENL with their peers according to grade level and NYSESLAT scores. Special education classes are programmed so that students can take ENL with their non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention services include extended day classes in literacy for ELLs. Specifically, these classes which are co-taught by an English language arts and English as a New Language specialist, aim to prepare ELLs for the New York State English Language Arts Test. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ELLs will be participating in the Arts Connection Digital DELLTA (Developing Language Literacy through the Arts) program; specifically, a theatre artist will be teaming with our ENL teachers. Moreover, a visual artist will be joining our ENL classes; this is made possible through a partnership with Flushing Council on the Arts. Students will be offered access to after school programs through the 21st Century School Grant including tutoring by JHS 189 teachers. We are implementing STAR assessment tool in ELA and math. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are involved in all programs offered JHS189 including volleyball, cheer leading, musical theatre as well as the various clubs that meet throughout the school day (ie: cooking, chess, movie,). We have partnered with several local cultural organizations such as Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts and Flushing Town Hall Grants are examples of supplemental services offered to our ELLs. Title III funding has been utilized for a summer program for sixth and seventh grade ELLs and will be used to provide additional after school programs for our ELLs during the school year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 66  In addition to appropriate textbooks, classroom libraries and magazines (Time For Kids, Junior Scholastic), Scholastic read-180 is utilized, particularly with our transitioning and expanding ELLs. This computer program allows teachers to test and then customize instruction for each English as a New Language learner. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Supplemental home language instruction is provided when a need is identified. Bilingual picture dictionaries in Chinese and Spanish, the primary home languages of our students (71.01% speak Chinese; 18.93% speak Spanish) are available to support our newly arrived ELLs. Additionally, we have for every classroom of ELLs, word-for-word dictionaries in Chinese, Spanish, Korean, etc. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required support services, and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Students generally use the same textbooks and other materials as their non-ELL peers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In addition to appropriate textbooks, classroom libraries and magazines (Time For Kids, Junior Scholastic), Scholastic read-180 is utilized, particularly with our transitioning and expanding ELLs. This computer program allows teachers to test and then customize instruction for each English as a New Language learner. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled students at the beginning of the school year or thereafter, the guidance counselor speaks to them about their classes, the school uniform, the planner and walks them to their class. The teacher then may buddy the student with a classmate who speaks the same language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to support the instructional program for ELLs, ongoing professional development to address instructional planning as well as congruency between core content teachers and ENL specialists are conducted either by school or outside staff. A team of teachers (ENL, science, social studies, English language arts and an assistant principal will be having a professional development session at the Queens North Borough Support Center. Paste response to question here: Teachers of ELLs meet in curriculum meetings to develop curriculum maps, write/share lessons and prepare performance tasks related to the Common Core Learning Standards. They utilize online resources. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Guidance counselors receive training to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school and/or middle to high school by attending workshops, mostly online. Teachers are provided with information about their students including date of entry, NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores and teacher reports from their previous school. All teachers will be provided professional development for 15% of the total hours. Agendas and attendance records will be kept in our professional development binder. ENL teachers will be provided professional development for 50% of the total hours by a combination of in-house and outside activities. ENL teachers will attend an Arts Connection DELLTA program session. This will be followed up by monthly reflection sessions with the teaching artist as well as other professional development workshops throughout the twenty-five session program spanning from October until March. A planning session for the Flushing Council on the Arts grant is scheduled for October and professional development is scheduled for October and January . Again, records will be kept. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas, are scheduled during the day or on Tuesday afternoons by the ENL teachers. Teachers access translation and interpretation programs on their iPads as needed. A record of these meetings is kept by each ENL teacher. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Monthly parent workshops are planned by our parent coordinator. Topics include high school admission, social studies exit project, how to communicate with your child, homework help, science exit project, assessments, reading/writing, preparation for the next grade and summer vacation. A student translation team is available to speak with groups of parents in their home language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. JHS 189 has a new principal that was appointed in June 2017. She and her admin team are exploring new programs, assessments, instructional platforms, and intervention strategies to support a growing ELL population. 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Magdalen Radovich, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Daniel Carter Beard JHS189 School DBN: 25Q189 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Magdalen Radovich Title Principal Denise Healey Assistant Principal Christine Colligan Parent Coordinator Dorina Sferrazza ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rossibel Celedonio Parent Erica Wahba/Science Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Bugay/ENL Teacher Efrosini Daskalopolous Diane Parada Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Chia Mizutani School Counselor Danielle DiMango Maria Vasillou Rozos Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member George Fitting Other AP Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 8/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 08/30/17 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q189 School Name: Daniel Carter Bear Superintendent: Danielle DiMang The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents indicate their language preference for written and oral communication on the HLIS and the Emergency Contact cards. Additionally, we check and enter the language preference on ATS. We obtain this data at the beginning of each school year, or when a student initally enters our school, and use it to facilitate effective communication with parents througout the year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 71  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral After analyzing the data described above, we have found that an overwhelming majority of our parents require written and oral translation in Mandarin, Cantonese, or other Chinese dialect (353) and Spanish (143). In addition, 26 parents require translation in Korean, 17 parents require translation in Urdu, 16 parents require translation in Bengali, 11 parents require translation in Punjabi, 7 parents require translation in Dari/Farsi/Persian, 5 parents require translation in Pashto and Philipino, 4 parents require translation in Hindi, 2 parents require translation in French and Haitian Creole, and 1 parent requires translation in each of the following languages: Albanian, Arabic, Burmese, Indonesian, Khoisan, Moldavian, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Tibetan, and Ukranian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that are distributed to families each school year include: a. school calendar (electronically via Skedula) - monthly 2018-19 CEP 72  b. parent-teacher conference notices - four times a year in September, November, March, and May c. information regarding high school admission process - d. NY State testing dates- April - June e. Title I Parent Bill of Rights (shared with parents via Skedula) - in the beginning of the year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? a. Parent teacher conferences: 9/16/15, 11/17/15, 3/17/16, 5/11/16 b. Parent workshops: 10/7/15, 10/14/15, 11/17/15, 12/16/15, 1/13/16, 2/10/16, 3/17/16, 4/20/16, 5/11/16, 6/15/16 c. informal parent-teacher meetings: weekly on Tuesday afternoons (as needed) d. Dean/Guidance counselor meetings with parents (as needed) e. IEP meetings (as needed) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All the requiements of Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding notification reqirements for translation and interpretation services are reviewed each year to ensure that they are in place. Specifically, translated versions of the Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities are provided to parents who require language assistance; a sign is posted near the primary entrance to the schoo building indicating the availabilty of interpretation services; our safety plan includes procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's adminstrative offices solely due to language barriers; parents of students who speak a primary language other than English or a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit, a translation into such language of the signage and forms reqired. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback from parents through the use of a parent survey that is distributed to parents at the beginning of the school year and at the end of the school year. Our parent coordinator meets monthly with the PTA to assess the needs of the parent community. 2018-19 CEP 74 
