2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q194 School Name: J.H.S. 194 WILLIAM CARR Principal: JENNIFER MILLER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William H. Carr 342500010194 6-8 School Number (DBN): 25Q194 154-60 17 th Ave. Whitestone, NY 11357 718 746 0818 718 746 7618 Phone Number: Fax: Jennifer Miller Jmiller15@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jennifer Miller John Fazakas Christine Nhieu John Fazakas N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7182817605 Phone Number: 7182817690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, 11101 4th Floor Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 9172252020 Phone Number: 7183918320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Miller John Fazakas Christine Nhieu N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Susan Olsen Jennifer Schilling Elizabeth Yarmy Member/ Staff Member/Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  JuiliWei Helen Christakos Vicki Poulos Tommy Koe Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At JHS 194, it is our belief that to develop and maintain a community of life-long learners it is essential to educate the “whole student”. While we strive to challenge every student through rigorous instruction and engaging tasks, we also look to support each individuals passion and talents with a diversified arts program. We believe that it is necessary for students to learn how to work collaboratively and support each other through success and difficulty. We further believe that in order for any individual student to be successful, they need to develop genuine tenacity, resilience, independence, and tolerance. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As of September 2018, JHS 194 is comprised of 1,308 students. The student population is comprised of 46.02% female students and 53.98% male students. The ethnic composition of JHS 194 is as follows: 42.43% Asian, 27.91% Hispanic, 26.38% White, 1.45% African-American, 0.61% Multi-racial, 0.54% American Indian, and 0.08% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander. 8.94% of our students are current ELL students and 15.21% are Students with Disabilities. JHS 194 has a diverse Fine and Performing Arts department. Students in the 6th grade participate in 2 choices during the year (with the exception of concert band). Students in the 7th and 8th grade participate in 1 choice during the year. Students choose their Fine and Performing Arts elective at the beginning of each school year. As a way to enhance students' experiences with the Sciences, Arts and the community, during the 2018-2019 school year we will look to continue our partnerships with organizations, such as: Urban Advantage, LeAp, the NY Historical Society, Jazz at Lincoln Center, City Center, Magic Box. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue our work with the Yale Center to have the adults and students within the 194 community trained in Emotional Intelligence and RULER. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018-2019 school year, 8.94% of our students are ELL and 15.21% are Students with Disabilities. Of the 15.21% students with disabilities, 63.32% receive full-time ICT services and 21.61% receive full time self-contained services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on our school's most recent Quality Review from May 2015, our area of celebration was in 4.2 where our teacher teams and collaborations have promoted shared leadership at JHS 194. Our school's area of focus was in 1.2, where it was identified that we need to continue our work to strengthen pedagogy in all classrooms to support student growth and success. Based on the 2018 NYS Common Core ELA exam, 61% of our students are performing at a Level 3 & 4, which is a 7% increase from 2017. When looking at how our students performed compared to their previous years data, our 7th grade showed 7% gain in level 3 & 4 and our 8th grade showed an 8% gain in students performing at level 3 & 4. Of our current 6th grade students, 62% are performing at L3 & L4. Based on the 2018 NYS Common Core Math exam, 60% of our students are performing at a Level 3 & 4, which is an 8% increase from 2017. When looking at how our students performed compared to their previous years data, our 7th 2018-19 CEP 10  grade showed a 6.7% increase in students performing at L3 & L4, while our 8th grade showed no change in students performing at L3 & L4. Of our current 6th grade students, 59% are performing at L3 & L4. When reviewing the 2018 NYSESLAT data, 120 students tested, 4 students were entering level, 8 students emerging, 27 students transitioning, 63 were expanding and 18 were commanding. The 4 students who were entering were first years and two students were NYSAA. Of the 8 emerging students 3 were first year, 3 second year and the other 2 students one was LD and the other student has a long-term health impairment. In reviewing the 2018 NYS Grade 8 Science examination data, our students mean score was a 75, which was a 3 point increase from the previous year. We also evidenced a 3% increase in students performing at Level 3 &4. When reviewing state accountability for the 2017 school year, JHS 194 met AYP in all categories for ELA with the exception for participation of the subgroup "white" and the performance of the ELL subgroup. When reviewing state accountability for the 2017 school year, JHS 194 met AYP in all categories for Math with the exception of Students with Disabilities subgroup. When reviewing state accountability for the 2017 school year for science, JHS 194 did not meet AYP in multiple categories, including: all students, Hispanic, White, Students with Disabilities, and Economically Disadvantaged subgroups. When reviewing the School Quality Guide for 2016-2017, For the Framework Element Scores, JHS 194 scored the highest in collaborative teachers and scored the lowest in Strong Family-Community Ties. Based on the Survey Element Scores, JHS 194 scored the highest in Effective School Leadership and scored the lowest in Supportive Environment. Based on the review of the data, our key areas of focus this year will be: - continuing our training of all staff and beginning our training with students in Emotional Intelligence and RULER as a means to be able to provide a supportive learning environment not only for students, but the entire school community. - evaluating our school based assessments (diagnostics, summative, and formative) as a means to understand our students and plan instruction and tasks that are appropriate. - focus on planning lessons that are standards based and in alignment with the needs of the students. Lessons that provide students with opportunity to engage in rigorous tasks and plan for the supports necessary so that it is equitable for all students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q194 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1241 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 54 54 4 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 66 45 4 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 59.0% % Attendance Rate 51.1% % Reduced Lunch 9.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 31.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.07 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 149 148 2 95.4% 7.3% 16.7% 1.3% 38.6% 1.0% 6 39% 9.1 60.1% 73% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Percentage of students attaining at L3 & L4, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core ELA exam was 61%, which was an increase of 7% from 2017.  Percentage of students attaining a L1, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core ELA exam was 14.8%, which was an increase of 2.4% from 2017.  Percentage of students attaining at L3 & L4, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core Math exam was 60%, which was an increase of 8% from 2017.  Percentages of students attaining at L1, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core Math exam was 19.1%, which was a decrease of 0.3% from 2017.  When looking at the Ethnic Population Data in respect to proficiency on the 2018 ELA exam, all subgroups showed an increase in percent proficiency: Asian 4.3% increase; Black 2.7% increase; Hispanic 4.9% increase; White 11.4% increase  When looking at the Ethnic Population Data, in respect to proficiency on the 2018 Math exam, all subgroups showed an increase in percent proficiency: Asian 5.7%; Black 8.3%; Hispanic 4.9%; White 11.3%.  Based on a review of the NYS Grade 8 science data, we had 76% of students achieve a Level 3 & 4, which was  an increase of 3% from the 2017 Grade 8 Science exam. For 2017, JHS 194 did not make AYP for all groups in ELA. We did not make AYP for participation of white students. We did not make AYP for our limited English proficient students. We did not make AYP for all groups in math. We did not make AYP for students with disabilities. We did not make AYP for science for all groups including whole school, Hispanic, white, students with disabilities, and economically disadvantaged.  Our most recent Quality Review provided our school with the Area of Focus on coherent instruction (1.2) and the Area of Celebration in teacher leadership and teacher collaboration (4.2).  The 2018 NYC School Survey evidenced that our lowest survey scores were in the categories of Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. A closer look at the questions indicated that: o 64% of students feel they learn a lot from their feedback o 60% of students indicated that homework assignments help them learn the course material o 59% of students indicated that teachers ask difficult questions in class o 57% of students indicated that they are challenged in most or all classes o 64% of students indicated they teachers make lesson relevant to everyday life o 55% of students indicated their teachers support them when they are upset o 60% of students indicated their teachers notice they have trouble learning something Our focus on planning as a means to support students and provide opportunity for all students to engage in meaningful and rigorous activities is in alignment with the data and the Framework for Great Schools - Rigorous Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 194 staff will be able to identify the indicators of rigorous instruction and plan rigorous standards based lessons everyday resulting in an increase in engagement and achievement, as evidenced by an increase in the percent of students attaining at a L3 and L4 on the NYS ELA and Math exam to 67%, while narrowing the achievement gap between all subgroups by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - PL on Monday afternoons around Rigor, understanding what Rigor is and what Rigor looks like in the classrooms Entire Staff - Professional Learning Cycles to support teacher teams in work around 1e (planning) - Professional Learning Cycles to support teacher teams around 3b, 3c, and 3d (discussion, engagment, assessment) - School-Wide Data analysis for ELA and Math to identify trends - Use of the NYS Item Analysis from the ELA and Math exam as a means to identify student needs at the start of the school year and revise curriculum. - Use of pre/post test data throughout the school year to track student progress within each unit of study in all core subject areas - Newsela - online program providing non-fiction text for all subject areas - Discovery Education - videos to enhance curriculum in all content areas- Entire population - Use of STAR Reading and math assessments as a diagnostic tool which will be used to track and monitor progress throughout the year. - Use of Khan academy to support students in their mathematics work - Reflex Math - online tool to support math fluency - Algebra for All - professional development for teachers - CUNY tutors who are part of the Algebra for All September 2018 – June 2019 Principal; Assistant Principals; Department Teacher Teams November 2018-June 2019 Principal; ELA and math Assistant Principal; ELA and math Department Teacher Teams ELA and Math Department 2018-19 CEP 15  Math Department September 2018 - June 2019 January 2019 - June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals; ELL coordinator/teachers; content teachers - Algebra for all coach for math teachers - Math First - Algebra for All resource focused on fluency Entire population Entire population Subgroups, ELL students, Students with Disabilities - Use of Algebra Nation to support students in their mathematics work - Algebra for All Math PD - Saturday Academy for ENL students - Use of Bilingual student glossaries for ENL students in all core subject areas - Discovery Learning (supplement to curriculum) - Newsela (supplement to curriculum) - Khan academy - Algebra Nation - Math First (fluency) - Reflex Math (fluency and skills) - Saturday test-prep for all students attaining lower than a L3 on either the NYS ELA and math exam - Before and/or after-school support in Math including peer tutoring and teacher tutoring 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Use of Pupil Path as a means to track student progress and keep students and families informed about progress within subject areas. This will be done by school staff throughout the school year. - Progress report sent home to all students as a mid year check point. - ELA Literacy Night, STEAM Night. - Emails to Parents around expectations about content and curriculum. - Use of Tuesday afternoon time to support parent engagement and work with parents in understanding their child's needs and how to better support them at home (with specific focus on subgroups). This will be facilitated by Assistant Principals and the Parent Coordinator. - Use of curriculum events throughout the school year to support engagement of both students and parents this will be facilitated by Assistant Principals and staff. - Provide parents with STAR assessment progress reports as a way to support them in knowing their child's strengths and deficiencies so they can provide support at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve our goal, teachers will collaborate during Monday afternoon in professional learning activities and teams. Tuesday afternoon time, as per the UFT contract, will be utilized to support parent engagement through team meetings with individual families or through planned department/grade level events. Curriculum events and celebrations will be planned, utilizing per session as needed for teachers to participate. Per session will be used to pay our teachers during our ELL Saturday academy. The use of ELA/Math support funds will be utilized to support Saturday Test Prep as well as before/after school support in math. Grants from the PTA will be utilized to also support our Saturday Test Prep. The use of Citywide Instructional Funds will be utilized to pay for coverage when teachers attend professional learning during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of students will be performing at grade level or higher in ELA and Math, as evidenced by the STAR Reading and Math assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STAR Reading and math assessment 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  For each grade, we have an Assistant Principal and Dean, housed on the floor for students and we have two guidance counselors for the school, one dedicated for grades 6 & 7 and one for grade 8.  Advisory periods will be provided to our 6th grade and 7th grade students as a way to provide them with coursework in bullying prevention, appropriate Internet and social media use, as well as lessons around emotional intelligence.  There was an increase in yearly incidents from 455 incidents during the 2016-2017 school year to 692 incidents during the 2017-2018 school year. The months of January and April showed the greatest increase in incidents when compared to the previous school year. Upon a deeper dive there was an increase in Level 1 incidents from 91 to 193, Level 2 from 48 to 74, Level 3 was 186, 274, and level 4 from 125 to 146 and Level 5 stayed the same.  When comparing suspensions from the 2016-2017 school year, there was an increase in superintendent suspensions by 13, an increase in principal suspensions by 15, and a increase in teacher removals by 33.  Our attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 95.62%.  Based on review of the 2016-2017 Survey, 54% of our students indicted that a few or none of their teachers recognized when they were upset. In comparing this to our 2017-2018 Survey, there was a slight increase in the response to the same question, where 55% of students indicated that in most of all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. Further review of the 2017-2018 School Survey indicated the following:  o Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment had the lowest scores (2.77 and 2.73 respectively), Supportive Environment results increased by .44%. o 67% of students agreed that discipline is applied fairly. o 40% of students indicated that in most or all classes student behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. o 74% of teachers indicated that the adults have access to supports to assist in behavioral/emotional escalations. o 51% of students responded that most students think doing homework is important. o 55% of students responded that teachers support them when they are upset. o 60% of students responded that their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. o 61% of students responded that teachers help them catch up if they are behind. The data evidences that our community priority is to strengthen our school's ability to support students not solely academically, but socially and emotionally. In order to do this, we need to work as a staff to strengthen our Emotional Intelligence and collaborate on appropriate responses that will support students who need assistance. This priority is in alignment with the Supportive Environment element within the Capacity Framework. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Emotional Intelligence and Social Emotional Learning teams, along with community partnerships at JHS 194, will train staff in Emotional Intelligence as a means to better support all students and foster a safe and inclusive learning environment, as evidenced by an increase in the percent of individual students with attendance of 90% or higher from 87% to 91% and a decrease of our yearly L4 and L5 incidents by 10% as measured through ATS and OORS respectively. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - Emotional Intelligence team will train staff on Emotional Intelligence and RULER Entire school community - Training of staff on the Citywide Behavioral Expectations - Training for staff on Chancellor's Regulations A-832 - Training for staff on Chancellor's Regulation A-750 and Mandated Reporting - Training for staff on Chancellor's Regulation A-412 and De-escalation - LSCI training offered to all staff - TCIS training offered to all staff - Anti-Bullying Assemblies 6th and 7th grade students - Mandatory cyber-bullying lessons for all students during Advisory periods - Utilization of a advisory program created to align to monthly focus of school - Letters to individual students indicating time and attendance concerns for school year - PPT meetings with a focus on attendance and student progress - Grade level PPT meetings to support identifying students at-risk or in need of support - Friends of Rachel Club - after school club focused on community service within the school - Before and After school clubs to increase socialization and build motivation Entire Population September 2018- June 2019 Administration; Deans; Guidance Counselors; Advisory Teachers; Teachers to facilitate Beautiful Me program October 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 November 2018 - May 2019 Teachers with Advisory Programs Administration, Deans, Guidance 2018-19 CEP 21  - At-risk counseling provided for students, as needed - At-risk SETSS - At-risk Speech - Newsela, Khan Academy, Algebra Nation, Reflex - Partnership with Jewish Board which provides and on-site Social Worker - After School YMCA Beacon Program One staff member to facilitate club Entire population October 2019 - May 2019 Entire School Community September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors Special Education Teachers Speech Provider 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. - Utilization of Pupil Path - online grade book and system to email parents and students to support communication in appropriate language for parents and families throughout the school year 2018-19 CEP 22  - Utilization of school wide calendar to inform families community of events throughout the school year - Utilization of Tuesday parent engagement time to host events to share data and engage parents and families with their child in discussion around emotional intelligence and ways to work together at home - Curriculum events, held on Tuesdays or evenings, during the school year to engage families in learning together - Saturday classes for parents of students who attend Saturday Academy (ELL families) - Workshops for parents on topics of interest and need, as determined through school survey - before November 2018 - Utilization of SLT and Safety Committee as resource to discuss data, discuss ideas and suggestions from the community of how to support and address areas of need - Parent Coordinator facilitated workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advisory periods will be programmed for students and part of teachers regular teaching program. We will continue to seek grants for outside partnerships and collaborations. Tuesday afternoon time will be used for parent engagement as per the UFT contract. Per Session and Per Diem will be utilized, if necessary, to support teacher and staff should they need to attend professional learning during the school day and/or need to work in the evening for an event. For advisory classes, we will utilize the instructional resources that are aligned with the student planners, purchased by the PTA as well as lessons that were created by a teacher for teachers to support their work during advisory periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the attendance data will demonstrate school-wide attendance rate of 97% and OORS data will evidence a 10% decline in all school incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OSYD site for data reports; ATS for attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Percentage of students attaining at level 3 & 4, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core ELA exam was 61%, which was an increase of 7% from 2017.  Percentage of students attaining at level 3 & 4, based on the 2018 NYS Common Core Math exam was 60%, which was an increase of 8% from 2017.  When looking at the Ethnic Population Data in respect to proficiency on the 2018 ELA exam, Asian students outscore all other subgroups, with the greatest gap between Black and Asian students at over 30%. In comparison to 2017 ELA proficiency data, there was a narrowing of the gap between Asian and Hispanic subgroup and Asian and White subgroup.  When looking at the Ethnic Population Data, in respect to proficiency on the 2018 math exam, Asian students outscore all other subgroups, with the greatest gap between Black and Asian students, at 57.7%. In comparison to 2017 Math proficiency data, there was a narrowoing of the gap between Black and Asian students and White and Asian students.  Based on a review of the NYS Grade 8 science data, we had 76% of students achieve a Level 3 or 4, which was an increase of 3% from the 2017 Grade 8 Science exam.  Our most recent Quality Review provided our school with the Area of Focus on coherent instruction (1.2) and an Area of Celebration in teacher leadership and teacher collaboration (4.2).  A review of the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicated that for Framework Element Scores, JHS 194 scored the highest in Collaborative Teachers and for the Survey Element Scores, JHS 194 scored the second highest in Collaborative Teachers.  The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey indicated the following: o 64% of students say that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday life experiences. o 60% of teachers say that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. o 65% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. o 74% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. o 74% of teachers say that they usually look forward to each working day at their school. The data evidences that there was progress made in students attaining proficiency on both the ELA and math exam. Our priority within this goal is to work collaboratively as a staff and community to support all students, with a focus on those students who attained a L1 on either the NYS Common Core ELA exam or NYS Common Core Math exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will utilize assessment as a means to identify each student's strengths and needs so that they can plan standards based lessons that focus on creating equity for all students, by affording every student an opportunity to engage in rigorous tasks and activities, with a focus on our lowest performing students and subgroups, resulting in a decrease in students school wide scoring a L1 on the NYS ELA and math exam by 5% as compared to 2018. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - The use of Monday professional learning time for teachers to participate in cycles of learning around data analysis, as well as 1e and 3d. Teachers in all departments September 2018 - June 2019 Principal; Assistant Principals; Professional Learning Committee; Teacher teams October 2018 - May 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Teacher Teams Administration CARP team identified through posting November 2018 - March 2019 IEP Teacher September 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams; ELL coordinator; Assistant Principals; - Analyze school-wide data to identify trends for ELA and Math - Use item skill analysis for Math and ELA to identify individual student needs - Teacher Teams will look at assessments and review student work to identify strengths and weaknesses with specific focus on students in both subgroups. - CARP team will complete cycles of learning to support teachers and school around instructional focus and enhance instruction. - STAR assessments for both ELA and math as a diagnostic tool for teachers in respective departments to identify deficiencies and ways to support students. - IEP teacher to provide professional learning for para-professionals to enhance their understanding of strategies that can be used to support students. - At risk SETSS and AIS for students between 1.90 and 1.99 in ELA Teacher Teams in all departments All teachers and students Para-professionals ELL and SWD students - Implementation of reading strategies within in special education classes and ELL classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 26 - Professional learning for teachers of SWD and ELL students around enhancing discussion and research based programs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, we will continue to utilize Tuesday afternoons to support parent engagement by hosting meetings and activities around understanding curriculum, celebrating student achievement, and understanding of the needs of middle school children. In addition, administration and guidance will work to establish meetings with parents and families of students who are in the identified subgroups as way to foster discussion on how to improve academic achievement. Providing them with STARS diagnostics reports and a mid-year progress report. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will utilize Monday afternoon professional learning time to participate in cycles of learning that will focus on Emotional Intelligence and Rigorous Instruction. Teachers will utilize professional materials we have at the school or that are available on the Internet to support their work. We will utilize data from 2018-2019 NYS assessments and the School Quality Guide to initially support work and then utilize data from the STAR assessments and school based pre/post assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will a 5% school wide decrease in students performing below grade level as measured by STAR assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STAR assessment for ELA and math Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  When reviewing the 2017-2018 Survey Element Scores, JHS 194 decreased in all areas except Supportive Environment. JHS 194 scored the highest in Collaborative Teachers and the Lowest in Supportive Environment and Rigorous Instruction.  73% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers.  62% of teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working.  50% of teachers say that they have influence over standards for student behavior.  There was an increase in yearly incidents from 455 incidents during the 2016-2017 school year to 692 incidents during the 2017-2018 school year. The months of January and April showed the greatest increase in incidents when compared to the previous school year. Upon a deeper dive there was an increase in Level 1 incidents from 91 to 193, Level 2 from 48 to 74, Level 3 was 186, 274, and level 4 from 125 to 146 and Level 5 stayed the same.  When comparing suspensions from the 2016-2017 school year, there was an increase in superintendent suspensions by 13, an increase in principal suspensions by 15, and a increase in teacher removals by 33.  Our attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 95.62%.  Based on review of the 2016-2017 Survey, 54% of our students indicted that a few or none of their teachers recognized when they were upset. In comparing this to our 2017-2018 Survey, there was a slight increase in the response to the same question, where 55% of students indicated that in most of all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset.  JHS 194 will continue to participate in the CARP program this year Based on the needs assessment data, we have identified opening communication and shared decision making to support our entire learning community. We also recognize the need for effective systems to track and monitor student progress, not only academically, but socially and emotionally. 2018-19 CEP 28  This priority is in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools - Effective Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all JHS 194 staff will continue their training in Emotional Intelligence, as we all as train students in Emotional Intelligence, which will help foster an environment where staff and students feel nurtured and supported, resulting in an increase in student academic achievement, as evidenced by an increase in school-wide attendance rate to at least 96.5% 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Continue to utilize our hiring/new teacher committee to conduct interviews and support new staff in our community(summer and every two months) - Increased opportunities for staff to visit each others classrooms and work collaboratively to share best practices with Highly Effective teachers - Opportunities for administration and all staff to work collaboratively on curriculum and planning during Monday professional learning - Opportunities for teachers to share in leadership roles by presenting professional learning and supporting one another during Monday professional learning and conference days (throughout the school year) - EI committee will meet at a group and with staff for a total of 10 times per year. They will provide training in EI, RULER, Mood Meter - Incorporation of Positive sayings in the student bathrooms and school entry way - CASEL program - staff self assessment - Before and After-School Clubs - Utilize Datacation - online gradebook and communication that translates into parent home language - Utilize school messenger, which translates messages into Spanish and English - Utilize Interpretation services, as needed, to support individual parent communication Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, Staff July 2018 - June 2019 Entire School Community School Staff Parents Principal; Administration; Hiring committee; Model Teachers, Instructional Team, all teachers Emotional Intelligence Team School Staff September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize the Tuesday parent engagement time, along with the four Parent-Teacher conference/engagement times for Middle Schools. In addition, we will host a variety of events for families during the year to take part in. We will look to host events in the evenings, as they are the most convenient for families, throughout the course of the year. All school staff will take part, along with students and the PTA to support such events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. There will be no need to fund the hiring/new teacher committee, as this will be done on a volunteer basis. Per diem will be utilized for the curriculum teams. If necessary, per diem will be utilized to provide coverage for teachers completing inter-visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 98% of students will be passing their four core subjects, as evidenced by report card data for marking period 1 and 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS report to measure student grades within core subjects Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The number of participants that took the NYC School Survey decreased in all constituent areas for the 2017-2018 school year.   JHS 194 scored the highest in Trust and the lowest in Supportive Environment as measured by the NYC Survey JHS 194 scored the highest in Collaborative Teachers and the lowest in Strong Family-Community Ties and Supportive Environment as measured by the Framework Element Scores In the category of Supportive Environment, some of the the questions that had the lowest score:  67% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school.  40% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching.  51% of students say that most students think doing homework is important.  55% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset.  60% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something.  69% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral/emotional escalations.  54% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. In the category of Strong Family-Community Ties, some of the questions that had the lowest score:  64% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction.  69% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often.  84% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. Based on review of the data, JHS 194 will continue our work with strengthening communication and parent involvement within our entire school community to support Family-Community ties. This priority is in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools - Strong Family-Community Ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 32  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2019, JHS 194 staff will partner with the PTA to create a culture of achievement by sharing Next Generation Standards, grade level curricula, and tools and strategies for use at home through the use of various social media, PupilPath, PTA website and Parent Conferences to result in an increase of parents/guardians agreeing or strongly agreeing that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn to 90% on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - Provide guest speakers at PTA meetings based on parent feedback (monthly) Parent community September 2018 – June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator, and School Administration - PTA meetings to be held both AM and PM to support parent schedules (alternate meeting times each month) - Parent workshops facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and other staff, to be held both during the school day and on Tuesday afternoon time. - Utilization of Pupil Path and School Messenger to inform and remind parents of events and meetings at the school - Utilization of Pupil Path and School Messenger which provides translation to parents - Utilization of translation services, as provided by the DOE to support bilingual parents - Use of Interpretation Services, provided by the DOE, during parent-teacher conferences as needed September 2018 – June 2019 ESL students, Student with Disabilities, and their parents ESL coordinator, Assistant Principal of ESL, Special Education teachers and Assistant Principal - IEP workshops to support parents of students with disabilities - School Wide Calendar - Principal emails to families about school policies and events Entire School Community September 2018 – June 2019 PTA and School Administration - Grade emails to families with information about curriculum and grade news - Pupil Path - online gradebook and communication site We will continue to focus on events at the school to increase parent and child involvement at JHS 194. Fine and performing arts celebrations; community service events, Paint Nite at JHS 194. As a school community, we will look for ways to invite parents to participate in activities with their son or daughter to support engagement and opportunities to increase communication and trust among all of us. Entire school community September 2018 – June 2019 PTA executive board in collaboration with school staff 2018-19 CEP 34  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  School Messenger phone system and Pupil Path will be utilized to ensure communication with parents in their home language and remind parents of upcoming activities and events. We will utilize survey monkey to create surveys to attain feedback from parents at least two times during the year. After school workshops and meetings will be held during the Tuesday parent engagement time. If additional workshops are asked for by parents, outside the contractual school day, per session will be provided to staff the necessary positions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in parent involvement for the school year as measured by attendance at the PTA meetings. In addition, 95% of parents who take the school based survey will respond positively to questions about family-community ties, as measured by a school based parent survey on survey monkey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School based survey on survey monkey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher feedback, report cards,NYS ELA exam, Dibbles Teacher feedback, report cards, and NYS math exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Newsela Individual and small group During the school day and after school Khan Academy, Reflex math, and peer/teacher tutoring Individual and tutoring During the school day, before and after school Science Teacher feedback N/A Social Studies Teacher feedback N/A Small group Small group During the school day During the school day During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPT team At-Risk counseling Small group and one-to-one 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37 School materials/supplies/books At-Risk counseling and guidance as needed with recommendation to outside supports, as per counselor, as needed and wanted 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 9,693 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. JHS 194, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary EducationAct (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. JHS 194 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) JHS 194, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials subgroups and grade levels of students to be served Begin description here: Rationale · JHS 194 maintains a group numbering 88 English Language Learners. *10 out of 25 students in grade 6 are Expanding * 14 out of 33 students in grade 7 are Expanding * 14 out of 30 students in grade 8 are Expanding with 10 out of 30 not NYSESLAT tested The chart below summarizes the population 6th grade 25 Students 5 no NYSESLAT 4 EN LBR; 1 TR LBR Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding 0 5 5 10 7th grade 33 students 3 no NYSESLAT 3 EN LBR 4 6 6 14 8th grade 30 students 10 no NYSESLAT 7 EM on the LBR 1 EX on LBR 1 no test no score 0 2018-19 CEP 50  language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 5 14 The rationale behind our program is to provide safe and secure environment for English Language Learners to explore topics and ideas outside of the rigorous classroom curriculum. In the Saturday Academy we have tried to integrate a hands-on, program of an academic nature that addresses areas of study not fully explored during the regular school day. · · · Subgroups and levels of students to be served In the language of English, the Saturday Academy provides ten language-rich hands-on/minds-on three-hour sessions (9a.m.-noon. The dates are: November 5, 2016, November 19, 2016, December 3, 2016, December 10, 2016, January 7, 2017, January 14, 2017, January 28. 2017, February 4, 2017, February 11, 2017, and March 4, 2017. Classes for the Saturday Academy are team-taught with an ESL licensed pedagogue who is partnered with an ELA content teacher. The anticipated group of 50 students will be divided into two groups of mixed language, mixed grade, high/low performance. One group will cross grade students in grades six and seven; the second group will cross grade students in grades 7 and 8. Each of the groups will be scheduled for exploration on the topic of "Flight" blending mathematical and scientific content, skills, and vocabulary. "Flight" will be co-facilitated by a licensed ESL/Mathematics teacher in partnership with an ELA teacher. The Mathematics teacher will focus on mathematical concepts, the hands-on building of airplanes while the ELA teacher will support word work and reading to enhance content and language acquisition. One group will be scheduled for "Flight" in the first half of the morning and the other in the second half of the morning. Students will create model airplanes with paper plates, paper trays, toothpicks and glue, tracking the speed of flight, and will create a group compilation with entries by all how-to book create model planes. All students will be reading articles on the subject and this will be differentiated from the NASA website, MyOn and the biography of the The Wright Brothers: How They Invited the Airplane by Russell Freedman, a non fiction book which incorporates original photographs. Moreover, to support the topic, students will be reading differentiated materials on the subject of flight from National Geographic, web materials from NASA, and appropriate and relevant articles from Word Generation, the on-line reading program. This is important work for the ENL students so that they can acquire the academic and tier III vocabulary necessary to navigate articles and photographs that are scientifically related. Saturday Academy curriculum is distinct from daily instruction. The second half of the program will focus on health, wellness, and foods from around the world. Students will be able to answer the question: "Are you a fit kid?" by the conclusion of the session. A celebration of healthy foods from an assortment of cultures will be featured on the concluding day of the ten sessions. During those sessions, teachers will focus on food and healthy habits and attitudes while implementing total physical response as a means of support of language and content acquisition. Materials from National Geographic, Word Generation, and illustration cards will enrich content acquisition and language acquisition through multiple modalities. The schedule will be as follows: 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information October 15, 2016 - January 28, 2017 9:00-10:30 Group A consisting of no more than 25 mixed language mixed grade high listening/speaking will attend "Flight"; Group B consisting of no more than 25 mixed language mixed grade low listening/low speaking will attend the health focused session with movement 10:30-12 The two groups will flop their schedule. March 4 2017 will be a healthy food celebration. Student attendance is documented by the teachers in the morning and provided to the supervisor for record keeping. Program notification consists of an invitation offered in English, Spanish, and Chinese. For families who speak other language, the invitation is interpreted by language translation services. There will be one supervisor on-site. No other supervisor will be on-site. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The rationale for professional learning at JHS 194 stems at least two data sets: one data set is the school learning environment survey which highlights the school's need to reflect on the level of engagement in all of our classrooms. While the school-wide goal is 1e, planning for engagement in instruction, teachers of English Language Learners, require a heightened focus on the topic asking: how do I inspire my students to speak in English, how do I support them to transfer their speaking knowledge to their writing. On the school-wide level, teachers will engage in a professional learning cycle of 1e from October to January and then focus on the bridge to practice from January to March. The teachers involved with the Title III grant engaged in a book study with a goal to develop oral language in the classroom with the Zwiers & Crawford's book Academic Conversations (Stenhouse). This year, professional learning for Title III staff members is a sustained focus on oral language development with the use of Socratic Seminar. Sustained professional learning through inter-visitation, planning, exploring an assortment of texts including Lily Wong Filmore's work of "juicy" sentences and construction/deconstruct will be embedded throughout the year. Teachers will view and be exposed to the blog. https://www.teachingchannel.org/blog/2014/10/24/engaging-english-language-learners-in-conversations-ousd/ which builds on the ideas from Zwier's book on Academic Conversations for English Language Learners. Moreover, teachers will participate from Socratic Seminar cycle of learning offered by the BFSC in the months of November and December. Teachers will be able to take advantage of DELLS offerings and borough offerings as they relate to conversation, engagement, and language acquisition of English Language Learners. Continued work and application of Word Work and Word Play: A Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction in K-12 Classrooms as part of the DOE CIPL Professional Learning Series will also be evidenced. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development Records of professional learning opportunities and those who attend are maintained by the Assistant Principal who supervises English Language Learners. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: Parents of English Language Learners at JHS 194 represent a full range of backgrounds and sophistication. As evidenced through parent meetings and in-house surveys, parents are interested in learning how to best support their children as they grow in middle school. Parents and guardians of ELLs are invited to meet with us on Tuesday afternoons. These meetings will be conducted by an ESL teacher with support of the Assistant Principal. The Assistant Principal has the option of creating meetings to serve the unique needs of each family including interpretation in the parents' preferred language and time of day. Here is the schedule of anticipated meetings: Session 1 December 6, 2016, 2:30-3:40 What are students learning? A review of curriculum shared by the teachers of that subject. Session 2 February 7, 2:30-3:40 What will students have learned in marking period 2 and what will they need to know in marking period 3. March 7, 2:30-3:40 What will students have learned in marking period 3 and what will they need to know in marking period 4. What is the NYSESLAT and what do students need to know. These sessions are to be scheduled throughout the year and will rely on data obtained from multiple sources and shared with parents. For each session, parents will be invited via Parent Coordinator, on-line messaging system, Skedula, and an invitation home. Additionally, interpreters will be available to assist parents in understanding the information provided. Every attempt will be made to offer materials to parents in the home language. Records are maintained by the Assistant Principal including agendas and attendance sheets as well as samples of the invitations offered in parents' preferred languages. The parent coordinator will also support communication of these events and offer materials in the parents preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem 3 teachers 15 x 3 x 52.48 = 1,574.40 x 4 (teachers) = 7,084.80 1 administrator 15 x 4 x 54.69 = 3,281.40 Total: 10,366.20 Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for three teachers (three ESL teachers -- one math, two ELA). Per session for one supervisor devoted to ensure the oversight of safe arrival and dismissal for students. There is no other administrator in the building at that time. N/A Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Materials are listed related to the study of flight and the "are you a fit kid" parts of the program. Also listed here are the books guiding sustained teacher professional learning. 4,318.8 lesson study cultural sensitivity Finish Line NYELLs package grade 6 and grade 7 and grade 8: $549.95 x 3= 1,499.85 Vocabulary Links 5 books Level C plus teacher guide, Phonics and Word Study: 5 books Level C plus teacher guide and Level F 5 books plust teacher guide (42.65+38.50+38.50 = 119.65) 10 copies of Making Thinking Visible: How to Promote Engagement, Understanding and Independence for all Learners by Ron Ritchhart (Jossey Bass Publishers Publishers) $14.95 x 5 = 149.50 10 copies of Socratic Seminars in Middle School: Texts and Films That Engage Students in Reflective Thinking and Close 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Reading Paperback by Moeller, Victor, Moeller, Marc $34.94 x 10= 349.50 Assorted notebooks, sentence strips and pens and materials to build planes $209.30 N/A N/A 500 12,366 N/A N/A Refreshments for parent workshops and local library visit in October 20, 2018 N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name William H. Carr Borough Queens School Number 194 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jennifer Miller Coach Not applicable ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Moffett Teacher/Subject Area Alex Cho/Math Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Cascio/LOTE Related-Service Provider Leah Hartman Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Maureen Robins Coach Not applicable School Counselor Maria Arestin-Sampedro Parent Paola Urena Parent Coordinator Ann Lippert Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) Harleen Sahni/ESL teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1281 2018-19 CEP 56 Total number of ELLs 115 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.98%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments are being used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs: Speaking: Teachers plan to utilize the ELL speaking baseline benchmark offered from Schoolnet and plan instruction to support students from that data. Beyond that, anecdotal data from teacher created tasks for speaking will be regularly collected and interpreted for use in planning specific speaking tasks, partner dialogue, small group conversation, and full group class share. Common core / NYSESLAT rubrics are applied when appropriate. Reading: Diagnostic assessments such as TCRWP running records with miscue analysis will support matching books with readers and assist teachers in planning skill and small group instruction, exploration into structures of language, vocabulary work. A close reading protocol developed by an administrator study group will be implemented. Writing: Teacher made benchmark assessments are administered and evaluated according to common core aligned rubrics. Writing assessment through teacher conferring and peer conversations about writing is ongoing. Continued instructional 2018-19 CEP 57  support will be facilitated through the writing conference which will assess, support, and instruct. Results from our running records, baseline assessments, progress monitoring tools, etc. will aid teachers in planning for small group instruction with emphasis on targeted ESL interventions and supplemental support as needed. In looking at the EDAT modality analysis, Expanding and Transitioning level ELLs excel at the speaking subtest. And conversely, newcomer ELLs in particular at the Entering and Emerging levels are challenged by speaking and writing subtests. One insight lands in the area of reading and reading instruction. We are wondering about how reading is taught to English Language Learners and what ways to make language meaningful for students. experience the worl 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures in place to support the effort include: Meeting time for team of teachers of English Language Learners to meet to review data, preview instructional targets, share assessments, during professional learning in a location specifically designated for them. Lessons are routinized to include multiple slots for formative assessment. Lessons are structured to include small group instruction and a “work period” which makes time available for one to one and small group conferring. Professional learning, such as offerings in RTI, implementation of Question Forumlation Technique (QFT) and other reading strategies, will be offered to support actions that could address deficits and strengths made visible from assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL programs is measured in variety of ways. Some examples are the number of ELLs who: demonstrate significant proficiency gain on the NYSESLAT, participate and engage with English-speaking peers and the school community at large rather than isolating themselves to home language silos, and attendance at our Saturday Academy and other extracurricular school offerings. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures in place to support the effort include: The team of teachers of English Language Learners will meet regularly to review data, preview instructional targets, share assessments, Lessons will routinely feature multiple slots for formative assessment. Lessons are structured to include small group instruction and a “work period” which makes time available for one to one and small group conferring. Professional learning, such as offerings in RTI and study groups around close reading, will be offered to support efforts to address deficits and strengths made visible from assessment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] JHS 194 will use data to guide instruction and develop levels of instruction for ELLs in content areas. The "work period" within content coursework provides educators with an set time for three levels of instruction. Content teachers in collaboration with the ESL teachers will put in place a systematic process for collecting information regarding ELLs backgrounds and educational history in order to determine how best to link current learning with background knowledge, provide a connection between teacher and student, and be better able to assess precise student needs for instruction. As outlined in the DOE RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs -- Creating an RTI Model for ELLs Academic Success, teachers will implement components of 4 actions steps: universal screening, strong core instruction, intensive tailored instruction, and progress monitoring. This work will be carried through to the school's Saturday Academy. 2018-19 CEP 58  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments data used to evaluate and inform ELL programs are comprised of NYSESLAT, ELA exam, and in class assessments and teacher observation in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Currently our ELL coordinator shares information through an email newsletter to the entire staff. A team approach to data and pedagogy sharing is under development. In addition, data is shared with all teacher teams as a means for them to identify areas of need for students and ways to revise the curriculum. Administrators will support the creation of a shared vision among the ESL and ELL team teachers. In addition, administrator will provide logistical support so that teachers may share and analyze data, problem-solve and plan. Information, particularly"important notes about this child," revealed from the EDAT tool will be explored and discussed. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped primarily in blocks to receive integrated ENL. This is accomplished by having an ENL teacher co-teach with a content teacher to the heterogeneous grouped ELA literacy blocks.. For 7th and 8th graders that require 4 units of standalone ENL, a pull-out program is organized by NYSESLAT band and appropriate curriculum. Data collected for an RTI approach is implemented in these pull-out sessions and applied to the appropriate ELA curriculum. Sixth grade students receive standalone ENL in a separate pull-out program. For the 2017-2018 school year a greater effort will be made to program students in a "platoon" to emphasize fuller English immersion possibility and targeted RTI instruction for the pull-out program. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL status is considered when initial class section assignments are made over the summer. As enrollment finalizes in the first weeks of school, a master roster of students and their required instructional minutes is circulated by the ELL coordinator among the grade level APs to assist with final adjustments of class assignments and scheduling. The majority of students requiring ENL services are programmed to the predominantly ELL class sections in which an ENL teacher works with the ELA teacher to create the combined integrated and standalone program described above. In these class sections, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ELA, and Entering and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ELA and 180 minutes of standalone ENL, that latter pulled from ELA class time. Where students are not in the predominantly ELL section due to class size or SPED needs, the majority of these students are Expanding level students and higher, so their required minutes are met by the other dually-licensed ENL teachers in the building or through a push in model where an ENL teacher acts in a more 1 to 1 or small group role within a standard classroom. For such students 2018-19 CEP 59  who are Transitioning level and lower, they meet with the ENL teacher a standalone ENL program, pulled from classes such as their art electives. The school ensures the appropriate number of mandated students for each of the five levels is accomplished through flexible programming of two full time ESL teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English in our freestanding ENL program, with multilingual instruction where applicable. Teachers utilize multiple entry points, such as visuals, text audio, and multiple and varied opportunities for discussion such as carousels, photograph and political cartoon analysis, sentence starters, and note taking devices. There is an emphasis on inspiring discussion; teacher devised conversation cards, prompts to turn and talk, an effort to switch table learners, and a new implementation of Question Formation Technique support oral language development and content knowledge.. Bilingual glossaries published by the state for specific content areas as well as dictionaries are available for students’ use in the classroom and at home. For select topics in ELA, bilingual handouts are created on an individual basis by the ENL and/or ELA teachers. Some of the methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards include: building background knowledge (previewing key concepts and vocabulary), shared reading activities, intensive vocabulary instruction (explicit teaching of word families, word parts, etc.), and the use of language frames (accountable talk charts/visuals, etc.). Finally, as part of this year’s CEP goal, the content area departments will focus on increased literacy support in their instruction as part of their professional development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Not applicable 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Once SIFE students have been identified using the questionairre and MLS, and other measures, their gaps are remediated through the use of online resources, such as Khan Academy, which is available in multiple languages, and select printed, leveled resources, such as the SIFE curricula available on the DOE Intranet. As our SIFE population is very small, the differentiation for each student is addressed on an individual basis as the gaps emerge rather than an established systemic routine at this time. Depending on need, SIFE students may be offered at-risk SETSS. Bilingual math tutoring is made available to students by ESL licensed math instructor. b. Instruction for Newcomers is differentiated to include: modified curricula that may include alternate core texts, translation-supported and other customized handouts, multilingual directives and classroom visual aids, embedded sentence starters and other language frames in classwork and assessments, careful use of peer interpretation support. Instruction includes every effort to increase phonemic awareness. c. Developing ELLs are frequently partnered with FELLs and model-English speaking peers as well as receive targeted instructional help through in-class conferring with teachers and/or invitations to extra help sessions. d. Long-Terms ELLs receive differentiated instruction primarily through pull-out sessions with ENL teachers that focus heavily on increasing reading comprehension and writing clarity. e. Former ELLs are required to receive 90 minutes of mandated services per week in an integrated setting; an ENL teacher pushes in to social studies and science core subject classrooms and receive instruction that focus heavily on expanding reading 2018-19 CEP 60  comprehension, writing ability, and vocabulary knowledge. Testing accommodates for ELLs and Former ELLs adhere to all requirements: students' testing schedules fulfill the time mandates; they are provided with appropriate glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs have access to visual word walls, bilingual dictionaries, content area glossaries, technology, i.e. laptops, with translation programs, etc. Core content teachers collaborate to provide instruction that supports language development as well as the demands of the Common Core curriculum. Some examples of in-class strategies that support our ELL-SWDs are the use of realia, TPR, discussion protocols, question formatting technique and wait time. Materials and visual presentations such as graphs, maps, photographs, drawings, charts, story maps and other graphic organizers are frequently used to partner with other learning modalities to build language and content knowledge. Teachers link new knowledge to prior knowledge with respect to students’ personal and cultural experiences. Libraries of books in languages other than English will be added for classroom use. Key concepts for the unit are posted in the room in student-friendly language. Vocabulary instruction is modified appropriately. Materials and units from the office of English Language Learners will be implemented such as the unit for "Lyddie" and child labor. For ELL-SWDs who score below benchmark levels, tiered RTI strategies are put into place to support academic growth and development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Because JHS 194 includes four periods of Fine and Performing Arts a week, an advisory period, and an auditorium period, there is flexibility built into the program for students to receive the supports they need. ELL-SWDs are provided with every opportunity to succeed and move to a least restrictive environment. They have multiple opportunities through Fine and Performing Arts programming and Physical Education to be immersed with the general education population. This enhances academic language immersion in grade-specific context to foster use of language and verbal expression. Several teachers on the ELL instructional team make themselves available during the lunch periods where students are able to receive additional support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Because JHS 194 includes four periods of Fine and Performing Arts a week, an advisory period, and an auditorium period, there is flexibility built into the program for students to receive the supports they need. ELL-SWDs are provided with every opportunity to succeed and move to a least restrictive environment. They have multiple opportunities through Fine and Performing Arts programming and Physical Education to be immersed with the general education population. This enhances academic language immersion in grade-specific context to foster use of language and verbal expression. Most intervention occurs in the classroom with differentiated work period tasks and small group instruction embedded in the class's "work" period. For those students who are IEPs or are at risk. SETSS services and speech services are available. Targeted intervention for ELA: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students include: Reading and vocabulary instruction using Word generation and Newsela. During the work period students are able to receive one to one or small group instruction that enhances language skills and content knowledge. Targeted intervention for Science: tasks are appropriate differentiated for student during the work period where teachers are able to confer and provide small group/partner/or individual skills or content lesson. Targeted intervention for Math: tasks are appropriate differentiated for student during the work period where teachers are able to confer and provide small group/partner/or individual skills or content lesson. Targeted intervention for Social Studies: tasks are appropriate differentiated for student during the work period where teachers are able to confer and provide small group/partner/or individual skills or content lesson. 2018-19 CEP 61  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Trend #1 Newcomers have made great gains in under 3 years. Out of the 13 students who achieved "commanding," 9 were newcomers in the 1-3 year mark. Trend #2 ELLs in the "expanding" level remain on that performance level. Trend #3 Long term ELLs continue to struggle to move to commanding either because of reading issues and/or possibly unidentified language disability. Out of 8 general education long terms ELLs, 7 remained ELLs and 1 achieved commanding. New programs or improvements: Reading skills: Instruction will shift to include targeted reading skill and AIS strategies with increased formative assessment. To support this, our school will begin implementing the Stars assessment report. Reading materials will be supplemented by units of study offered through the department of English Language Learners.Teachers will be further supported with resources to support independent reading from hte CIPL Professional Learning Series selection, "Reading with Power and Passion." Increased questioning through the use of the Question Formulation Technique will increased structured discussion and inquiry and assessment. Professional learning community of teachers of English Language Learners will share practices and the ESL coordinator will facilitate professional learning, share strategies, and engage in inquiry. Attention to social/emotional learning will be focused in school-wide professional learning to promote students sense of safety and willingness to learn and take risks with their learning. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs. ELLs are also invited to participate in the school’s City Councilman supported CASA program in partnership with MagicBox where students build their own cameras and use them to mount a show, “Cameras in our Community.” Specific after school and supplemental services that are targeted in their availability to ELLs include: Saturday Academy, a Title III program, and other grant-supported field trips and programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Translated textbook versions (Spanish), state-published content area glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and laptops are available in all ELL classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The use of translated textbook versions, state-published content area glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and anchor charts, laptops, and teacher-provided oral interpretation (where possible) in ELL classrooms provide home language support in our ENL program model. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Administrators, testing coordinators, and the ELL coordinator work to ensure that all required services and resource support corresponds appropriately to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school’s testing coordinator and ELL coordinator collect and organize appropriate information and share it with teachers and staff. Grade level PPT meetings are a regularly scheduled time for review of services and supports. Department, grade and team meetings also allow staff members to ensure that all students receive required services and resources. The Language Access Coordinator ensures that materials are shared with the appropriate ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 62  Not applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the school year, school counselors meet with new students to ensure adjustment to the new school and surroundings. Typically, arrangement for this support time and meetings is organized at the suggestion of the ELL coordinator who meets regularly with the department and grade level teams to assess new students’ adjustment. The school provides orientation to new sixth grade student when those students are in the last months of their fifth grade terms. In the 2016-2017 school year, bilingual counselors met with ELLs on a weekly basis for a cycle of 8 weeks. The counselors were available to meet with parents and their children as well.. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the only language elective available in our school, and is currently offered to ELLs in the 8th grade. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? T 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. JHS 194 will meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 of 15% for all teachers by offering a professional development plan that aligns to reading, language acquisition and social emotional development. Cycles of professional learning will include time for teachers of English Language Learners to engage in inquiry, book study, and turnkey learning from outside of school professional learning from the district and/or from DELLs offerings. This includes professional learning around Question formulation technique, AIS and reading instruction as well as professional learning through inter-visitations within the building and to other buildings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 2018-19 CEP 63  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individualized meetings are conducted with ELL parents simultaneously during DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences and/or during weekly parent-teacher meeting time slots that are made available for such discussions. In preparation for this meeting, building staff members able to translate for the major home languages represented are scheduled to attend the meeting. For languages not spoke by staff members in the building, parents are encouraged to bring English-speaking family or friends and use of the Translation & Interpretation Unit is considered if the former is not possible. Individual parent meetings, in addition, are scheduled during Tuesday afternoons, during the allocated parent engagement times. However, administrators will accommodate a meeting any time that meets the needs of the individual parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement is fostered in several ways. They are: ● Outreach by guidance counselors and classroom teachers as necessary ● School-wide use of translation services to ensure clear communication ● Use of Skedula/PupilPath, which offers a message auto-translation feature ● Establishment of “ELA Tuesdays” in the month of October and November and planned “PE Tuesdays” to invite parents with their children to participate in activities. ● Open houses, High School Nights, concerts, art shows, and drama performances that foster acculturation ● Multilingual website run by the ELL coordinator that contains essential ELL programs information, ELA curriculum info, ESL learning resources, student reference resources, school calendar, and more. The Parent Coordinator is the Language Access Coordinator. She has attended all district-wide parent coordinator trainings. Translation services offered through Big Word or staff members available and fluent in a second language. Team members rely on services from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jennifer Miller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William H. Carr School DBN: 25Q194 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jennifer Miller Title Principal Maureen Robins Assistant Principal Anne Lippert Parent Coordinator Lauren Moffett ENL/Bilingual Teacher Paola Urena Parent Alex Cho Teacher/Subject Area Harleen Sahni Teacher/Subject Area Not applicable Not applicable Coach Coach Maria Arestin-Sampedro School Counselor Danielle Dimango Yasmin Torres Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 03/01/16 03/01/16 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 03/01/16 03/01./16 03/01/16 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q194 School Name: William H. Carr Superintendent: DDimango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our parent coordinator who has been trained as the Language Access Coordinator uses the RAPL report from ATS to organize home language by homeroom so that when information is disseminated, a translated edition may be attached to the English version for items to be backpacked. School blue cards on which parents indicate their preferred language of communication are consulted when calling home and best efforts are made to aligned the languages. In the event that the matter is urgent, a staff member may be requested to translate or T/I is used. When using Schoolmessger to call home, there is an availability for Spanish translation. When using Skedula/Pupilpath, emails are Set to auto-translate for parents. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Korean, Chinese, Arabic, Turkish, Ukranian, Urdu, Vietnamese 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Department and school-wide parent newsletters, monthly calendars, school announcements, testing announcements, 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum nights, sixth grade open house (October), back to school night (October), parent teacher conferences (November, March, May sessions), high school night (October), art performances (December, May/June). We are increasing plans provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 68  for ongoing parent engagemetn Tuesday sessions. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school's "Welcome Poster" is displayed in the main lobby as is the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. The Langauge ID guide is posted at the security desk and in the main office. The Parent Coordinator maintains a list of student home languages and shares them with homeroom teachers so that notices can be shared in the student's home language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ESL teacher regularly confer with parents over the telephone or via email to ensure that there is communication between school and home. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents via survey or email for feedback on the quality and availability of services which is then shared with the administration. 2018-19 CEP 69 
