2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q195 School Name: P.S. 195 WILLIAM HABERLE Principal: BERYL BAILEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: William Haberle Elementary School 29Q195 342900010195 Pre-kindergarten - Fifth School Number (DBN): 253-50 149 th Avenue,Rosedale, NY 11422 718 723-0313 718-723-7826 Phone Number: Fax: Beryl Bailey bbailey@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Beryl Bailey John Spano Jawanda Boling Beryl Bailey Valerie Alce n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: Superintendent’s Office Address: 191-02 90th Avenue Hollis, NY 11423<br> Superintendent’s Email Address: BMitche2@schools.nyc.gov <br> (718) 264-3146 (718) 712-1598 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Queens,NY Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 522-7133 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Beryl Bailey John Spano Jawanda Boling Valerie Alce Valerie Alce Adrian Powell *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rebecca Keslowitz Myrna Garnett-Ross Katherine Alston Wendi Marom Dathney Eugene Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the PS 195 Magnet Academy for Multimedia Arts & STEM is to infuse Multimedia Arts and STEM into students' lives on a daily basis. We will provide our school community with an empowering learning environment where lessons and activities are hands-on, comprehensive, and meet the needs of different learning styles, where all students experience success. In partnership with the home and the community, our mission is to ensure that our students embrace the future with confidence and exceed expectations of excellence. P.S. 195 serves approximately 2018-19 CEP 9  550 students in grade Pk - 5 with 50.65% male and 49.35% female students. Fifteen percent of the students receive special education services. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 195 is a Title 1 Magnet school, with over 90% of students being eligible for free or reduced lunch. 98% of the student body consists of Black (93%) and Latino (5%) students. Asian and other identified races account for 2% of the student population. Students With Disabilities (SWD) account for 20% of our student body. We offer a wide range of academic programs, including English as Second Language, Special Education and Gifted & Talented (G&T). We promote an individualized standards-based education that is challenging and based on the individual learner. As each student has his or her unique strengths and challenges, our teachers strive to teach in a variety of ways to tap into those strengths and address those challenges. We aim to provide each child with the opportunity to grow academically in the areas of science, technology, engineering, mathematics (STEM), multimedia arts, English language arts (ELA), social studies, among others. In addition, we provide students with opportunities that promote their social-emotional growth as well. Strategic collaborations include partnering with National Basketball Association Cares, Pilots Association, and the New York City Dept. of Parks and Recreation, which provides water safety and swimming lessons for all second-grade classes. In addition, we have strategically formed a collegial collaboration with P.S. /I.S. 116, a K-8 school in Southeast Queens. Collaborating with a school that includes middle school grades provides our teachers and staff with a greater understanding of what is needed to prepare students for success in middle school. At P.S. 195 we encourage all parents to participate in any and all workshops and activities. For the most part, we usually have a large parent turnout to all activities. Some of these activities are Multi-Cultural Night, Meet The Teacher Night, The Holiday Show, Grandparents Day Performance, Spring Concert, Spring Carnival, Movie Day, Community Resource Fair, Basketball Night, and much more. P.S. 195 provides parent workshops on select Saturdays on various topics. Translators are always available at these workshops for French, Spanish, and Haitian-Creole speaking families. We also have a Book Club that provides books and other supplies to ELL students and their parents. The school usually partners with other agencies or Community Based Organizations to provide workshops or services to ELL parents. This year PS 195 is partnering with the Junior Tennis League to provide tennis instruction for parents as well as the Department of Parks and Recreation Services and the Department of Health and Fitness for swimming lessons. Discussions at PTA meeting as well as SLT meetings are used to determine parent need. After the needs are determined, workshops are designed to address those needs. Parental involvement activities address the needs of the parents as they are focused and designed based on the wishes of the parents through a parent survey at the beginning of the year. We consider all of our stakeholders and members of our community and make it a point to maintain this climate and culture. 2018-19 CEP 10  Based on our initial review of data and looking at assessment data gathered during the 17-18 school year, and our school vision, we have decided to focus our efforts on ensuring rigorous instruction in science, technology, mathematics, and media arts. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with disabilities are integrated into all activities in the school. In addition, we have an adaptive physical education program and an action based lab which both provide modified activities to meet the needs of special populations. Approximately 85 students receive special education services, and 10 students, which represent 1.85% of the student population are identified as English Language Learners. Students with disabilities include 11% receiving related services, 54% self-contained services and 25% receive integrated co-teaching services, and 8% of students receive special education classroom services or part time integrated co-teaching services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At Public School 195 during the 2017-18 school year, we reviewed and implemented the Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools. The component of the framework in which we have made the most progress is “Supportive Environment”. The creation and supporting of a strong climate is one of our biggest strengths. We have consistently over the year maintained a school environment that promotes closing the achievement gap among Students with Disabilities (SWD) and black and Latino males. The data from the School Quality Guide indicates that we are meeting the target with 38% of our students moving from SC/ICT/SETTS to Less Restrictive Environments. Data from our Annual School Survey supports our strength of having a supportive environment as 90% of our staff and parents indicate that they feel supported at Public School 195. In addition, many of our activities and initiatives promote the development of such a climate. For this year the element that will be the key focus for this coming school year is Rigorous Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q195 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 564 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 68 65 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 13 26 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 73.2% % Reduced Lunch 2.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 6.2% 0.4% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.1 2% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 42 26 92.0% 11.3% 15.8% 90.8% 1.2% 1.4% 2 17% 6.1 17.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to the Danielson Framework, the majority of teachers are Effective in component 3C (Engaging Student in Learning). We believe that component 3C and 3B are directly related and want to capitalize on 3B to raise the level of engagement in all classrooms. We recognize that planning and direct instruction must touch on the following components in order to align with strong educational practices rigorous instruction: instruction must be customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the CCLS. This can be accomplished through effective questioning and inquiry. In addition, it is our goal to bring inquiry to the forefront this year. We are devoting significant resources to developing our Science-Technology-Engineering-Arts-Math ( STEAM) foundation by further integrating science and literacy across all grades and classrooms. Using information from the NYSED School Report Card, the NYC School Survey and team reflection our needs include the following: 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction): Nearly 90% of teachers are already either effective or highly effective in this area. However, we would like to see an increase of efficiency in the execution and delivery of teachers’ planned lessons. 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques): Currently, the majority of our teachers are effective in this area. We would like to continue with teachers increasing on the continuum from effective ratings toward highly effective to help engage students through higher order questions 3c (Engaging Students in Learning): We would like to see a 5% increase in highly effective ratings to help improve student motivation in rigorous instruction. The priority need that will be addressed this year is rigorous teaching. Preliminary assessment data from 2017-2018 showed a need to make greater gains in ELA and mathematics. In order to achieve this our primary focus is to ensure teachers are providing students with rigorous instruction. We want teachers to increase releasing responsibility to the students, as well as increase classroom and school-based extensions for the gifted and talented student population. This includes, but not limited to the use of rubrics and scaffolds for the students with disabilities 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have a 50% increase in student engagement. Teachers' will design and implement Project Based learning units for Grades K through 5 in Literacy and Science. Students will engage in interdisciplinary learning with a cumulative project at eh conclusion of the unit. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Mathematics and literacy leads will meet with teachers in the beginning of the year and pre-identify checkpoints per school year. They will provide model lessons and feedback of teacher lessons as well as support for planning units of study. All unit plans are provided to administration upon creation. Administration and staff attend professional development meetings and classroom observations which serve as a vehicle to ensure that the work is being implemented properly. Data surrounding mathematics, reading and writing levels are submitted four times a year for data analysis. Professional Learning cycles to develop content understanding and pedagogy in mathematics and science will take place in 2018-2019. In order to address the needs of SWD, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups classroom teachers and educational assistants will use mathematical routines and practices in the classroom to help support SWD, ELL and high-need student subgroups. I-Ready Math professional development across grades, staff coaches, EngageNY. Common Core curriculum, specialty groups, professional development, lab sites, inter-visitations, peer observations, parent workshops. Administration Teachers Paraprofessionals September 2018 (initial planning meeting) Administration Oct Dec, Feb, Apr, Jun 2019 - Model lessons and feedback Nov, Feb, May - Work is submitted June 2019 - reflection meeting Sep Nov, Jan, Mar, May - Model lessons and feedback High-Need Subgroups, teachers, and educational assistants Administrators, Lead teachers All students PK-5 September 2018, November 2018 Supervisors, Teachers of K, Grades 1-5, ELL and Students with 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement February 2019 and May 2019 Disabilities,Instructional Lead Teachers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To promote family understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core the Parent Coordinator will be responsible for organizing parent workshops for parents. The lead literacy teacher will work with the parent coordinator and magnet specialist to ensure that information is provided to parents online and during the workshops. The workshops will have focus groups for some in the beginning to identify the needs of the parents, and from Nov - May, the workshops will have a monthly focus. In June another focus group will be used to highlight strengths and areas for change for the 2019-2020 school year. Through parent workshops and during designated parent engagement times, staff members will provide materials and training to assist parents in building their understanding of CCLS and offer ways to engage and support their child at home. Parent workshops will be regularly scheduled during the year to support their understanding of curriculum. Topics to be covered over the course of the year will include: Curricula support, Testing information, Supporting your ELL, Supporting your SWD, How to understand your child's IEP, The Arts, monthly workshops with different topics each month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to implement this goal, we will utilize the expertise of our consultants, mathematics lead teachers, grade leaders, administrative team, etc. We will also assess our present instructional resources such as mathematics resources available in the Professional Learning Library, Envisions materials, on-line resources, Webinars. We will also use  Tuesdays for Parent Engagement work  Mondays Professional Development  Schedule - Build in multiple common preparation periods to provide grade level teams with time for consistent and ongoing planning Instructional leads and grade leaders – Ensure grade team coherence and consistency Survey parents and guardians to determine needs/wants of parents to offer workshops/resources   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  During the 2018 -2019 school year teachers will implement strategies from professional development sessions during the instructional periods. By January, 2019 Teachers will have become familiar with observation protocols and engage in reflective conversations with peers and administrators. Records of observations will be kept and monitored. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) During the 2018-2019 school year the Advance system, and Danielson Framework will be used to assess progress. Teachers will have an improved rating in the four domains of the Danielson Framework which they are evaluated. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: Based on our School Survey data from 2018 over 90% of teachers and families report that they feel that PS 195 is a supportive environment. The administration and staff members work closely with all students and their families in making sure they have a safe and supportive school environment. To continue this success rate, we are developing an instructional focus that will provide all students (including SWD and ELL’s) with the skills to increase their levels of independence and to help prepare them for success in middle school, secondary school and college and careers. The school has established classroom cultures and a school culture where students are respected, feel safe, and are supported. Need: Advance data reveals that teachers need support in developing highly effective practice in Danielson’s 3c Engagement and 3b Questioning and discussion. Results from the Quality Review results in indicator 1.2, Instructional Core, shows the same need. Therefore, Professional Development is crucial for teachers and staff to participate to improve the school’s collective ability to support all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 70% of students in grades 1-5 will increase by .5 proficiency level in mathematics and ELA as evidenced through their interim assessments and student data portfolios. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will develop an action plans to guide their efforts to support their students based on the identified trends and implement these strategies. Teachers will share their findings and results with their supervisor and monitor for progress. Teachers, teacher teams Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Teacher Teams, & Administrators All classrooms will incorporate Project Based Learning (PBL) into their teaching. These lessons will provide all students, with hands-on experiences. All students, Teachers, and staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Literacy lead teacher, administrators Teacher teams will participate in bi-monthly Professional Development cycles that will identify gaps in instruction, and identify different methods for teaching simple mathematical calculations with fluency and deep understanding. Teachers, Administration, Staff members Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, administrators, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. To promote family understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core the Parent Coordinator will be responsible for organizing parent workshops for parents. The lead literacy teacher will work with the parent coordinator and magnet specialist to ensure that information is provided to parents on-line and during the workshops which will occur monthly during the 2017- 2018 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include school staff (teachers, parent coordinator, administration), web based instructional resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In November, January and March students will complete checkpoint assessments that will be reviewed by the teacher to monitor their progress. Results from interim assessments in February will indicate progress toward meeting the goal of improving student gains in their academic studies will include feedback that shows students which areas they improved, or declined. In addition students will receive next steps which need to occur in order for them to improve their ELA and Mathematics assessment performance.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessments, including interim assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: At PS 195 we celebrate having high expectations of students and staff. Our Quality Review indicates “Through a variety of systems and structures staff and parents regularly collaborate in fostering an environment that contributes to ongoing progress in achieving the school’s high expectations and promotes improvement in staff and student achievement." From the feedback in the Quality Review and NYC School Survey we understand the need to improve pedagogy and increase student engagement in all subject areas, we have developed the goal to improve teaching and build on a strong collaborative community at Public School 195 with the caveat that student achievement will improve if all students have “highly effective” teachers. Needs: - Monitor and revise instructional practices, focusing on STEM development, as well as support teacher teams which will directly impact student learning. -Continue supporting teachers leading and supporting teams to identify their specific goals/tasks. -Teams need to have clear objectives for achievement and evaluation of grade level coherence and performance. - There is a need to look at student work for trends, weaknesses, purposes, and actions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 an increase of 50% of teaching staff will utilize various technology based programs and forms as a way to communicate, share resources, and learn from one another creating a meaningful integration of technology for increased communication, exchange of ideas and sharing of practices. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in collaborative discussion and actions to share trends they have identified in student work and develop future action plans to support student outcomes All teachers Bi-monthly September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, teachers Via Google drive teachers and support staff have access to lessons, ideas and practices across grade levels to address the needs of SWD and ELL. All teachers, staff members September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and Technology Coordinator Teachers and staff members will collaborate with colleagues to create various ways to engage with parents including parent newsletters, parent workshops, and during monthly school events. Through regular parent workshops and during identified parent engagement times, provide materials and training to assist families in building their understanding of technology and offer ways to engage and support their child at home Teachers, parent coordinator Staff and parent coordinator Bi-monthly September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support families to understand collaborative teachers and families, the school will provide parents with open house dates, and opportunities to visit classrooms and engage with teachers on Tuesdays and planned school events to engage with teachers and understand the importance of collaboration. Key personnel will include the parent coordinator, literacy and mathematics lead, and administrative staff. This will take place from November - June, 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduled time for teachers to meet and scheduled teacher inter-visitation periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 75% of teachers will share their professional learning notes and agendas through the use of technology-based programs. In addition, teacher teams will meet to analyze student writing work using protocols to guide discussion and determine next actionable steps to aid with improving student outcomes. Each of these will be monitored through agendas, minuets, and attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Web based surveys will be used as an instrument to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to build upon existing structures and continue to meet the needs of our community it is essential for our school to continue to utilize distributive leadership strategies to increase success. Staff members learn best from each other and from actively engaging in collaboration, team planning, and inquiry work together. We need to increase opportunities for teachers to collaborate and learn together while looking at student work to make informed decisions regarding instruction. According to the data from the NYC School Quality Guide and School Survey strengths of school leadership include: - -95% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for P.S. 195 -95% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school -93% of teachers say that they trust the principal -98% of parents say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them -95% of teachers say that curriculum and instruction are well coordinated across different grade levels Parent communication is consistent and clear - Use of technology to create multiple pathways for assessment and communication -Well organized events (parent/teacher conferences, Curriculum Celebrations, Fall Festival, Holiday Show) - Utilizing community resources and conducting outreach to bring in outside resources to support the school’s academic and social-emotional programs, including Reso-A funding for technology, playground equipment from a donor school, Learning Leaders training organization for parents, Materials for the Arts and others. Other strengths include: Needs: - Providing concrete pieces of actionable feedback to teachers as a result of frequent classroom observations. - Opportunities for vertical teams to share work and goals with the entire staff -Establish google drive and Gmail addresses for staff through google documents to offer transparency support collaborative efforts to strengthen instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will increase the level of performance in the component 3c: Engaging Student in Learning as measured by the Danielson Framework of Teaching Rubric as compared with the pre and post teacher observation rating in the Advance system. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Parents will be invited to promote school activities and lead parent events. -Parents will be invited to workshops on understanding the structures in the school such as Response to Intervention and Special Education Services. Provide opportunities for aspiring school administrators to attend leadership opportunities offered by the New York City Department of Education and other educational administration programs and organizations. -Through work with our SBST, we will look for strategies to support students with disabilities. -Teachers will partake in classroom inter-visitation to observe best practices and to investigate which additional resources and support would work best to ensure students with disabilities are meeting their individualized goals. - ENL teacher will collaborate with classroom teachers to support ELLs to meet their individualized goals Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, guardians, staff members September 2018- June 2019 School leadership, ESL teachers, Classroom teachers, Special teachers , Related Services Teachers, Leaders, Aspiring Leaders Teachers, staff members, students September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Lead Teachers, Support Staff September 2018 - June 2019 School leadership, ESL teachers, Classroom teachers, Special teachers , Related Services - Meeting of vertical teams which will meet several times during the school year to ensure continuity of curriculum from grade to grade. Staff members, students September 2018 - June 2019 School leadership, staff members - Continuation of educational leadership team which will meet several times a year. The goal of the cabinet is to help prioritize areas of concern for the community. - Flexible schedules for developing teacher leaders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  In order to engage families in understanding school leadership and strategies, administrators will host open houses and morning conversations where parents can meet with administrators to understand the dynamic and importance of engagement between parents and school personnel in order to promote student achievement. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will include the parent coordinator and magnet site coordinator, and school administration. This will take place from October, 2018- June, 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Professional development to support teacher leaders. - Funding for planning time for teachers prior to leading sessions for the staff. -Monday Professional Development -Per Diem – Fund substitute teachers to attend workshops -Schedule - Provide common preparation periods to provide grade level teams with time for planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be an increase of 5% parent involvement in school activities/events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instruments used to measure progress include monitoring PTA and school event attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have developed a welcoming environment for parents and families. According to the NYC School Survey over 95% of parents are satisfied with what their child is learning and would recommend P.S. 195 to other families. From the feedback gained during our quality review We have identified a need to increase in parental involvement, especially for at-risk students, and to increase CCLS aligned academic support at home. A strong tie between home and school is critical to the success of our school. Based on data such as the learning environment survey, school snapshot, parent conferences, and teacher-team meetings, we would like to continue to strengthen this connection. Strengths: - Parent involvement on regular basis in variety of activities - Parent-staff communication systems are in place - Availability of bi-lingual staff to support and provide translations for students and families Needs: - Continued parent workshops to educate parents on the standards and curriculum - Supporting parents on understanding the expectations for each grade level and subject area - Continue to provide and encourage families to take an active role in their child’s education and the school environment - Educating parents about the school system, special education, and school structures, to help empower parents and to create supportive and active parent leaders In addition our school strengths include, involvement with local officials (Councilman Richard’s Reso-A grant for technology purchases), monthly family night activities, monthly school-wide anniversary celebrations, Food Drive, perfect attendance incentives, Materials for the Arts as a resource for materials, partnership with the SUNY Old Westbury to expose students to a college atmosphere and on-going interactions with college students. As indicated by the NYC Schools Survey the majority of parents have received invitations to school events, and are satisfied with the school learning environment (feeling welcomed, having high expectations for children, provides information about what children are learning, etc.) bringing members of the school community together to participate collectively in building the school environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 28  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, Administration and staff will increase parent attendance at parent workshops which will be offered at various times (during the week and weekends) to accommodate parents’ schedules as evidenced by a 50% increase in parent attendance. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Building activities focused on building trust such as individual invitations sent home, families received personal phone calls encouraging attendance and workshops for small groups of families. Teachers, administrators September 2018 - June 2019 School staff, administration In addition the school and PTA will continue monthly family engagement activities (ie Literacy Night, Supermarket Bingo, , Harvest Party, etc.) P.S. 195 will have members of the school community available to provide translation services to Haitian-Creole and Spanish speaking families during regularly scheduled school days and events (e.g., curriculum nights, workshops, parent-teacher conferences). School Counselor will be available to meet with families and provide workshops relating to emotional support of students at school and at home Parent Workshops: Needs-based workshops will be provided to parents. workshops will help parents support their children, academically, socially and emotionally. Workshops will take place during and after-school, and also on the weekend. To increase attendance parent involvement and engagement P.S. 195 will have monthly scheduled parent meetings for chronically absent students directed toward improving student attendance, and continuing excellent attendance of those students who have not had an absence. Teachers, school staff, students September 2018 - June 2019 School Counselor Teachers, administration, school staff members Teachers, Parents, SLT members September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parents, SLT members - Parent Coordinator will support dissemination of information through bulletin boards, notices, School messenger outreach and fliers in backpack mail to advertise workshops Families, Staff members September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, administration 2018-19 CEP 30 Parent Coordinator will be involved in planning and implementation of workshops 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Thrive NYC, SNAP Queens Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Engagement Tuesdays, per-session, Workshop for Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 there will be a 25% increase in parent attendance at workshops. This will be measured through the use of attendance forms and surveys to identify if attendance is increasing at parent workshops and if the needs of the parents are being met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument used to monitor goals will include parent surveys and monitoring attendance logs at workshops and events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Periodic monitoring of scores . Students who are not making projected progress are provided with AISservices for a specific time frame. Periodic assessments, student work assignments Science Student Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) School Based Literacy Program Small group and one –to- one tutoring Imagine Learning for ELLsand SWDs When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Average 2 times per week for 30 minutes Guided Reading Interactive Writing Differentiated Instruction Envision classroom and online program support Guided Math Groups Student Centered Projects Small group and one –to- one tutoring Small group During the school day Average 2 times per week for 30 minutes Weekly on Fridays for 90 minutes during the school day Weekly on Fridays for 90 minutes during the school day During the school day as scheduled and needed Average session: 30 minutes Social Studies Student work and portfolios Student Centered Projects Small group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent inquiry, teacher referral School Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker Small group and one –to- one tutoring 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Public School 195 Queens along with our outside community resources partner together to assist our STH with the necessary items to help alleviate some of the burdens that may be placed upon the families. Such help is given through clothing, food and school supplies. Once a STH is within our school our team ensures that their immediate needs are met to help create a welcoming learning environment. This environment includes supports for the student and family members. We will provide clothing for uniform and supplies for school (books, pencils, pen, etc.). Homework help will be provided during school hours for the students who need. Assistance will be provided for students medical needs such as eyeglasses, dental and asthma by referring parents to low cost or free agencies. Transportation will be provided for students to and from school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33 We provide STH access to supplies and materials needed to facilitate normalcy during school hours. As needed they are provided with supplies and clothing. In addition the support staff work with students and families in temporary housing to identify their needs and methods to access resources. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P.S. 195 has a selective recruitment and retention process. Prospective candidates are evaluated on several dimensions, including their demonstrated knowledge and innovative teaching strategies and classroom management. In order to support highly qualified teachers P.S. 195 supports teachers who identify professional conferences to attend and share resources, and inter-visitation with other schools. In addition teachers view, discuss, and use best practices they view on-line. Teachers will be provided with and engage in high quality professional development to ensure that the staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At P.S. 195 we tap into the professionalism and expertise of our teachers. Ever year teachers attend various professional development classes to build on their knowledge base and keep abreast of the new advances in education. Many staff members lead professional development meetings, which include understanding of mathematics and science content, effective unit planning, increasing student engagement, using assessments to drive instruction, mathematical shifts, classroom management, technology development, art in the classroom, and other topics related to improving student achievement. Teachers work collaboratively in teacher teams which are led by the grade leader. Teacher teams plan together, examine student work, share effective teaching and managerial strategies as well as share resources. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 35  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-K staff works collectively to help ensure a supportive process for new families. An open house is provided for families in the Spring prior to the child's enrollment. Teachers reach out to students prior to their arrival in school. In addition we enlist support from the office of Early Childhood Education to ensure teachers receive Professional Learning opportunities specific to educating young children. Families will be invited to walk their child to class if needed, and they can pick them up from the room to ensure daily communication with the teacher. In addition the social worker and instructional coordinator will meet with parents and staff as needed to provide methods of support for the students that need them. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At P.S. 195 the leadership team, which includes teachers, meets several times a year ensure that appropriate assessments are used for student development . Grade leaders share information with every teacher on their team, and in turn bring back comments, suggestions, and reflection regarding assessment results to improve instruction. Essentially, grade leaders represent the voice of the other teachers on their team. Teachers and staff members will be invited to join various committees that impact the culture, instruction and morale of the school community. Staff members will take part in meetings where votes and decisions are made and information dispersed that impacts the school community. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 36 purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X n/a n/a X Column B Section Reference(s) 3,5,7,8, 7 0 0 3,4,5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 275,990.00 89,487.00 0 0 3,051,978.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 37   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 195, Q. in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 195, Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,Every Student Succeeds Act /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 195, Queens, in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA Act), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 41  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act ; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; School Responsibilities The William Haberle Elementary School PS 195Q will : 2018-19 CEP 43  1. Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: ● Students will receive instruction from state certified teachers. ● Standards based Literacy and Mathematics Programs are used for instruction. ● Teachers attend ongoing professional learning to enhance their instructional skills. ● Instructional materials are updated annually keeping up with all new assessments. ● AIS ● Use academic learning time efficiently. Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences. ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the CCLS. 2. Hold parent-teacher conferences (at least annually in elementary schools) during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: In September a Parent Forum is held where parents are informed of the vision for that school year as well as expectations. From the forum the parents meet with the individual classroom teachers and discuss the grade expectations for the present school year. Parent Teacher conferences are held in the Fall and Spring of every year. Conferences are Held in November and March. At that time teachers distribute report cards and meet individually with parents to discuss their child’s progress. In February we hold a Conference with the parents of all PID’s. In the spring a Conference is held with all parents of students being held over. 3. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: November, January, March, Mid May and June. 4. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. Teachers are available to meet with parents during their preps. Some staff members make themselves available before and after-school. 5. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities , as follows: Parents that wish to volunteer in the classes are required to attend and be certified as a learning leader. 2018-19 CEP 44  Parents are welcome to come in and observe, but, they are required to make an appointment. For the safety of the students we do not allow parents to walk in and sit in a class. If a Parent wishes to come and just observe through the door they may do so and they are accompanied by the Parent Coordinator. Additional Required School Responsibilities The William Haberle Elementary School PS 195Q will : 1. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 2. Involve parents in the joint development of any school-wide program plan, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 3. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend. 4. Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. 5. Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. 6. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. 7. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least math, language arts and reading. 8. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulations (67 Fed. Reg. 71710, December 2, 2002). 9. Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. 10. Ensuring that the Title 1 funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. 11. Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint. I have read the above compact and understand the school and my responsibilities. _____ __________________ _______________ 2018-19 CEP 45  September 2018 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Parent Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  Monitoring attendance/punctuality.  Making sure that homework is completed.  Monitoring amount of television their children watch . 2018-19 CEP 46   Volunteering in my child’s classroom .  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education.  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time.  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate.  Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS Student Responsibilities We, as students of PS 195Q, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  Do my homework every day and ask for help when I need to.  Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day.  Study for a minimum of 20 minutes per day. Study habits will help me prepare to go to college. 2018-19 CEP 47  2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name William Haberle Elementary Borough Queens School Number 195 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Beryl Bailey Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Garvin Chapman Teacher/Subject Area Indira Gaddipati/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Anise Antoine/Common Branches Related-Service Provider Allison Tober, Speech Superintendent Beverley Mitchell Assistant Principal Janieka Fairley Coach N/A School Counselor Katherine Alston Parent Michelle Harrison Parent Coordinator Annette Harris Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 563 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills in ELLs are the DRA2 and the QRI. These tools are instrumental in identifying students' strengths and weaknesses. Based on the information collected from these assessments, all teachers design and incorporate techniques and strategies that are aimed at addressing the needs of the ELL student. The assessments are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards so that the required skills are mastered on every level. The DRA2 Benchmark Assessment measures each student's reading proficiency through systematic observation, recording, and evaluating of performance. The QRI is an individually administered, informal reading inventory designed to provide diagnostic information about the conditions under which students can identify words and comprehend text successfully and the conditions that appear to result in unsuccessful word identification, decoding and /or comprehension. Interim assessments are also used to assess student growth/challenges and the impact of teaching strategies that are used. 2018-19 CEP 50  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There are numerous supports in place to support this effort: 1. Inquiry Team containing ELL teacher, Special Education teachers, Common Branches teachers and Reading and Math coaches. The Inquiry Team members analyze all data and help support instruction based on findings. 2. Weekly Common Grade Planning where all grade teachers share data findings from Inquiry Team and design cohesive strong lessons that address all student needs, including ELLs. 3. ELL Teacher attends regular professional development classes to build on knowledge base and gain new skills and strategies. 3. Professional Development from the ELL teacher to help all teachers with strategies and tools to help address strengths and weaknesses found in data from DRA2, QRI, interim assessments, and teacher made assessments. 4. Weekly Administrative Team meeting to review all efforts from all teams as well as identify resources and tools necessary to build overall student success. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS 195 we evaluate the success of our ESL program through the movement from Entering to Commanding on the NYSESLAT, as well as the ability of our ELL students to integrate and participate, with confidence, in the school community. We know that our program is a successful one if the ELLs are making big strides academically, are not afraid to make mistakes, and are involved in the many extra-curricular activities at the school. The school meets AYP for ELLs by ensuring that they receive rich, data-driven, differentiated, rigorous instruction. Students are given the opportunity to grow academically through meeting the requirements of the CCLS. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered the various school teams (Administrative Team, Inquiry Team, Teacher Teams, and Instructional Teams meet in order to identify/review/analyze the following: 1. Teaching successes and shortcomings 2. Effectiveness of supports 3. General curriculum design and implementation 4. Resources 5. Assessments/mini projects 6. Professional Development Necessary changes and adjustments will be made to facilitate student success for the next unit, semester, or project. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework by making sure that instruction meets the needs of students based on the data. Instructors ensure that all tasks are rigorous, challenging, evidence based, and focused. If an ELL struggles with a particular skill within a subject area then he/she will receive AIS services, and participate in special skill-based activities. The requirements of the NYS Common Core must be met by each and every student at PS 195. The RTI is used to develop different key domains of literacy, to support competencies in reading, writing, listening, and speaking and to present instruction that makes direct and appropriate connections to ELLs’ community values, identities, and languages. RtI is designed to provide all students with access to high quality, effective instruction and differentiated supports with a goal of ensuring that referrals for evaluation and possible referral to special education are accurate. At the start of this process, all students are screened each academic year—typically in early fall and up to two additional times during the school year—to determine whether they are at risk for not meeting standards. Currently in New York City Public Schools, RtI is required for students in grades K–5, in literacy. Students demonstrating patterns of concern in the screening process are provided with increasingly intensive interventions, as needed, with the goal of academic recovery in reading. Student performance is regularly monitored at all tiers of RtI to assist school staff in determining whether students are making adequate progress and to ensure that interventions and supports are adjusted accordingly based on student needs. Students who do not make progress in Tier I (in the classroom) are provided with additional instructional support in Tiers II 2018-19 CEP 51  and/or III. This can mean more time, smaller group size, individual instruction, or a greater focus on the specific area(s) in which the student is having difficulty. Tier II intervention is provided in addition to regular classroom instruction. Typically, the student is taught in a small group, receiving additional instructional time and/or taught using more intensive, research- based techniques. Tier III intervention is also provided in addition to regular classroom instruction. Typically, the student receives more frequent and intensive support than in Tiers I or II, sometimes on an individual basis. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels and grades reveal that students in the lower grades tend to struggle more with the speaking modality as they have difficulty expressing themselves. For the upper grades (3-5), students struggle with skills such as reading comprehension, making inferences, and attacking problems that require higher order thinking skills. The ESL students come in with a lot of life experience that is used by the teacher in the classroom to enhance their learning experiences. The ESL teacher evaluates the data from both the NYSITELL, interim and classroom assessments, and NYSESLAT to guide instruction. The information gathered from these assessments is also shared with classroom teachers so that they are aware of the student's strengths and challenges as seen on the assessments. The recent Spring assessments and NYSITELL results show that a majority of the students have difficulty with the speaking and writing modalities and therefore require special attention in these areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings the ESL teacher shares information from the EDAT with the Inquiry Team, Instructional Team, and Teacher Teams so that effective measures can be put into place for student success. The EDAT provides a comprehensive breakdown of data that monitors student advancements, regressions, and stability. Once the data is reviewed the various teams ensure that the target student receives the appropriate services that foster student growth and success. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are serviced by a certified ESL teacher in a free standing program of heterogeneously grouped students through push-in/pull-out services, which include English Language Arts and Content Area instruction. The instructional minutes are 360 minutes per week for beginner/entering/low intermediate/emerging students. Students who are intermediate/transitioning/advanced/expanding receive 180 minutes per week. Proficient/commanding receive 90 minutes of service per week. Students at the beginner/entering stage receive a minumum of 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Students who are at the low intermediate/emerging level receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Intermediate/transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL or ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: No TBE program c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 52  Paste response to questions here: No DL Program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The instructional minutes are 360 minutes per week for beginner/entering/low intermediate/emerging students. Students who are intermediate/transitioning/advanced/expanding receive 180 minutes per week. Proficient/commanding receive 90 minutes of service per week. Students at the beginner/entering stage receive a minumum of 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Students who are at the low intermediate/emerging level receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Intermediate/transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL or ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction has been supported by the acquisition of supplemental instructional materials aligned to the New York State Common Core Standards. Practices and approaches include, but are not limited to, scaffolding to support student learning in the content area, bridging techniques that connect new concepts to prior knowledge, using multi-cultural literature and visual aids in content area instruction, and employing dramatic and oral presentations to enhance communication and understanding. The school uses a comprehensive reading program that develops literacy skills through read-alouds, guided reading, phonics instruction, and modeled and shared writing. The ENL teacher uses moves such as Collaborative Poster, Think-Pair-Share, chunking texts, asking text based questions, having instructional conversations, and employing a lot of word work, and word play, among others. Differentiation is a big component of this program so that students at various levels can succeed. We also use Wilson for struggling students, and Raz-kids and Imagine learning online programs for enrichment. At PS 195, we use a very comprehensive math program known as Envisions. This program is aligned with the NYS Common Core requirements and places similar importance on students’ ability to use language to effectively perform and communicate their understanding. Students are challenged to not only compute mathematical problems, but also express in writing their thought process for solving these problems. The Science and Social Studies programs are also common core aligned and are aimed at challenging the students' thought process. In Science and Social Studies, where there is a lot of technical jargon, the target language uses are expressed in meaningful progressions that assist teachers to appropriately scaffold and support students in continually building the capacities needed to develop sophisticated content knowledge, skills and abilities. In the ESL program the language used is English. The scores from the NYSESLAT and periodic ELL assessments also help teachers plan programs that best fit ELL needs by allowing them to group like students for tailored learning activities, or pair students at different proficiency levels in class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 53  a. PS 195 uses the Achieve3000 program to address the needs of English Language Learners (ELLs)— including Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) and long-term ELLs (LTEs)—by building skills in reading comprehension, vocabulary and writing. Because the program takes current articles from the Associated Press and rewrites them for twelve different reading levels, students have access to high interest articles that are motivating and relevant to various areas of study, e.g., health, history, education, the environment, technology, business, spotlight on people, elections, and arts and entertainment. Achieve3000 benefits include: • Opportunities to differentiate instruction for heterogeneous groupings; • Texts that are read aloud for students at the Beginning Reader (BR), 1, or 2 reading levels; • Use of the native language for SIFE students with low literacy skills; • Opportunities to gain self-esteem for long-term ELLs who are below grade-level in literacy; • Access to a web-based writing center which provides a host of activities, prompts, and graphic organizers to assist students as they develop skills in expository and persuasive writing. b. For students in US schools less than 3 years, we provide students with supplemental instruction in literacy, Math, and Science. We work with students in small groups and look at both content area and the delivery of the language that is being used to teach the content area. c. The students receiving service for 4 - 6 years receive comprehensive hands-on instruction. This instruction is done in small groups with the ESL teacher so that the student's needs are met. d. Students who have more than 6+ years in the ESL program receive vigorous academic interventions, receive differentiated instruction, are grouped according to their abilities, and are monitored regularly to assess academic and social growth. e. The plan for former ELLs is to continue to monitor their academic and social performance in their classroom as well as the general school community. The ESL teacher will maintain discussion and inquiry into their work, strategies being used, and programs provided for them so that they continue to have resources available to them. ELL students who exit the program receive mandatory services by the ESL teacher to continue academic and social support. ELLs and Former ELLs receive test accommodations such as exta time on all assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are as follows: 1. Vocabulary and Language Development - discussing vocabulary words key to the concept and exploring specific academic terms that start a sequence of lessons of larger concepts and builds the student's background knowledge. 2. Guided Interaction - structured lessons so that students work together to understand what they read - by listening, reading, and writing collaboratively about the academic concepts in the text. 3. Metacognition and Authentic Assessment - model and explicitly teach thinking skills crucial to learning new concepts. Authentic assessment involves the use of a variety of activities to check students' understanding and not just relying on advanced language skills. 4. Explicit Instruction- direct instruction of concepts, academic language, and reading comprehension strategies needed to complete classroom tasks. 5. Meaning-based Context and Universal Themes - using students' own experiences and using them as a springboard to interest them in academic concepts. 6. Modeling, Graphic Organizers, and Visuals - The use of a variety of visual aids, including pictures, diagrams, and charts, helps all students easily recognize essential information and its relationship to supporting ideas. Visuals make both the language and the content more accessible to students. 7. Chunking the text with instructional conversations to help build comprehension skills. 8. Word Work and Word Play - to practice spelling, vocabulary or high frequency words kinesthetically and visually to support students' moving words into their long-term memory. 9. Using scaffolds, such as Sentence Frames to assist entering and emerging students. 2018-19 CEP 54  10. Collaborative Poster - students work on a text, select something that resonates with them and come to a consensus to create a poster with meaning. Students are different color markers so that they are held accountable. 11. Instructional conversations 12. Think-Write-Pair-Share 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by ensuring and carefully evaluating the academic programs that are used and allowing time for community-based activities that involve the entire school. At PS 195 it is very important that all students are included in and are a part of all that goes on. This is done by the recognition that all teachers are teachers of ELLs and Students with Disabilities. Through numerous internal and external professional developments all teachers are given multiple strategies and tools that allow all the students, including ELLs and SWDs, to gain access to the curriculum in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS 195, the literacy program has a component that specifically targets ELLs. We also use online interactive websites called Raz-kids.com and Imagine Learning that assist both parent and child in literacy. These programs can be accessed at home and at school. Students who are struggling with literacy also receive help using the Wilson program. PS 195 acknowledges the importance of integrating language and content. For math, the students and parents can also work together using the Envisions math program that the students have access to at home using the online component. Learning a second language is most effective when the focus is on using langauge to learn about a particular topic. Content area instruction has been supported by the acquisition of supplemental instructional materials aligned to the NYS Common Core Standards and through the development of themes and content topics. Thematic instruction provide meaningful vocabulary and grammatical structure. Students build a foundation of academic language which is enhanced by exposure to both new and familiar vocabulary. Since PS 195 houses a freestanding ESL program where English is the language of instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs or improvements will be considered at this time due to budget constraints. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. PS 195 ensures that ELLs are included in all school academic and extracurricular activities. Some of these programs are: Afterschool Tutorial, AIS, Student Council, Band, Chorus, Dance, Step, Varsity Basketball, Technology Team, and Scholastic Writers of Tomorrow. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used to enhance ELL learning are: the use of Smart boards for instruction, laptops, listening centers, audio recordings, videos, computers programs and technology games, robotics, coding, charts, graphic organizers, television, iPads, and numerous interactive websites, such as Imagine Learning and Raz-kids.com. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 55  Native language support is facilitated by dual language books given to all concentration classes. Dual language books and resources are available in the library for students and teachers. The ESL teacher speaks limited French and Spanish, which are the native languages of the ESL population. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required support and services are made available to all ELL concentrated classes. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, picture books, audio/video manipulatives, and hands-on materials are available in each grade level. The age and grade appropriate materials are given to all concentrated classes and the ESL teacher, who pushes in to each class to provide support to teachers and students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials that are used to enhance ELL learning are: the use of Smartboards for instruction, laptops, listening centers, audio recordings, videos, computers, games, charts, graphic organizers, television, iPads, and numerous interactive websites. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school offers translators to assist in the registration process. The Parent Coordinator offers information on organizations that would assist parents and students who are new to the public school system 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development workshops will continue to take place during common preps, on PD days, and at after-school workshops to enable teachers to better meet the needs of their ELL students. The PDs focus on strategies to strengthen the English proficiency of the English Language Learners. Teachers are introduced to activities and suggestions to improve the performance of these students as well as the appreciation of different cultures and languages.The teachers of ELLs are the assistant principal, ESL teacher, common branches teachers, special education teachers, guidance counselor, psychologist, speech teachers, occupational/physical therapists, secretaries, and the parent coordinator. All teachers receive ongoing professional development on the Common Core Learning Standards throughout the year. Each professional development class is taught with all members of the school community in mind, and therefore, is designed to help instructors meet the needs of every student, including the ESL student. 2018-19 CEP 56  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher collaborates with the mainstream teachers regarding student progress, curriculum, available ESL materials, testing concerns, and ESL techniques. The ESL teacher continues to monitor the progress and language development of those students who have passed the NYSESLAT. The mainstream teachers are informed of their students' status and if necessary, AIS is provided. Professional development workshops are used with mainstream teachers to teach them various techniques and strategies that can be used to assist in transitioning students for elementary to middle school. The guidance counselor also receives intensive training on identifying different schools and programs offered that would best meet the needs of the students transitioning from Elementary school to Middle school. ELL training for all staff consists of introducing various ESL instructional strategies and techniques, discuss common trends and findings within the ESL population, and looking at ways in which components of ESL can be integrated into the core curriculum. During the training, teachers analyze and design lessons that would interest and motivate students, use lessons that use all the senses, and manage all ability levels. All staff is required to attend multiple hours of professional development in order to improve and enhance their repertoire of teaching skills and practices. English as a new language teachers receive special professional development in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Each and every professional development that a staff member attends is recorded and kept in a folder in the principal's office along with agendas and materials used. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend meetings with teachers to discuss goals of the ESL program, student progress, any periodic or classroom assessments, and strengths and weaknesses in all content areas. Letters are sent home to parents in the language indicated on the HLIS. Parents return tear-offs to indicate whether they can or cannot attend any meetings. Teachers make accommodations for a translator prior to any meeting. All progress and academic achievements, as well as language development are shared with the parents throughout the school year through progress reports, report cards, and scheduled meetings available every week. Translators from the school are available for parents who speak French, Spanish, and Creole. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At PS 195 we encourage all parents to participate in any and all workshops and activities. For the most part, we usually have a large parent turnout to all activities. Some of these activities are Multi-Cultural Night, Meet The Teacher Night, The Christmas Show, Grandparents Day Performance, Spring Concert, Spring Carnival, Movie Day, Father-Daughter Dance, Basketball Night, and many more. PS195 provides parent workshops on select Saturdays on various content area topics. Translators are always available at these workshops. We also have a Book Club that provides books and other supplies to ELL students and their parents. 2018-19 CEP 57  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Beryl Bailey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 195 School DBN: 29Q195 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) BERYL BAILEY Title Principal JANIEKA FAIRLEY Assistant Principal ANNETTE HARRIS Parent Coordinator GARVIN CHAPMAN ENL/Bilingual Teacher MICHELLE HARRISON Parent INDIRA GADDIPATI Teacher/Subject Area ANNETTE HARRIS Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach KATHERINE ALSTON School Counselor Beverley Mitchell Anise Antoine Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Common Branches Allison Tober Other Speech Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 na na 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 na 6/22/2018 6/22/2018 na 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q195 School Name: PS 195Q Superintendent: Lennon Murray The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Garvin Chapman Language Access Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language preferences of the parent community are assessed on the information completed on the Home Language Identification Survey, which includes an interview with the student and parent to determine the student's home language. Therefore, the home language is determined based on a combination of the interviews with the parent and student, and responses to the questions on the HLIS. For students coming from a NYS public school (outside of the NYCDOE), the DOE school must contact the sending NYS public school to obtain home language designation, NYSITELL (or LAB- R) and NYSESLAT results within 5 business days. The data request must be made for any student entering a NYCDOE school (grades K to 12) who has been enrolled in a NYS public school within the previous 2 years. Home Language surveys are also given to parents in their native language. Over-the-phone interpretation services are available through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents can receive language assistance and have their questions answered in their preferred languages.For new students coming from another DOE school, ATS reports (BIOU) can be pulled in order to identify the 2018-19 CEP 61  preferred home language. The HLIS should also be located in the incoming student's cumulative folder. Information regarding parent language preferences can also be found in the the Emergency Contact cards as well as surveys conducted at the beginning of the school year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Haitian Creole Spanish French 583 6 8 3 97 1 1.33 0.5 580 7 10 3 96.51 1.16 1.66 0.5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of The documents that PS 195 typically disseminates every year that require translation are standards and performance expectations, rubrics, progress reports, newsletters, conduct and discipline rules and regulations, safety and health pamphlets, special education and related services information, entitlement letters, legal or disciplinary notices, calendars, parent-teacher notices, after-school program information, NYS testing dates, letters from school leadership, school trips, general announcements, and surveys. September to June translated documents to parents. At PS 195Q short in-house documents that need to be translated are done in-house by professional staff who speak the language in need. Documents containing critical information regarding a student's education are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. For on-site interpretation services that are not covered by school personnel, PS 195 will reach out to the DOE-s contracted vendor, The Big Word. Documents that have to be disseminated to the parents must first be emailed to the Language Access Coordinator (Mr. G. Chapman) several weeks in advance, depending on the type and complexity of 2018-19 CEP 62  na na na the document. The Language Access Coordinator is aware that there are several factors that may affect translation turnaround time, such as the amount of text, numbers of languages, and the complexity of the forms. The Language Access Coordinator will make sure to do the following: 1. Allocate extra time and involve the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the start of planning. 2. use plain language - avoiding idiomatic expressions and acronyms. 3. Be mindful of the design of the documents being translated - leaving space as languages may expand in translation 4. Use Microsoft Word 5. Complete a Translation Form and submit it to translations@schools.nyc.gov along with the file to be translated. Once the documents are returned to the school, they will be distributed to the parents. na na na na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Face to face meetings at PS 195 usually are Meet the Teacher Night in September, Parent -Teacher Conferences in November, March, and May, IEP meetings, Conduct and Disciplinary meetings, Entitlement September to June interpretation service(s)? PS 195 plans to provide interpretation services by: 1. Using bilingual staff at the school. We currently have staff that speak Spanish, French, and Haitian Creole. 2018-19 CEP 63  meetings, and Safety and Health meetings. 2. Using over-the-phone interpretation services. PS 195 will call Language Line to obtain an interpreter. This can be done by dialing 1855-249-9103, indicate the language needed, and provide the school's DBN (297195). For on-site interpretation services PS 195 will contact the DOE's vendor, the Big Word. When preparing for a request for interpretation services PS 195 will pay close attention to the languages that will be spoken as well as provide a draft of the schedule and agenda for events with multiple workshops or breakout groups. na na na na na na na na na 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency PS 195 will contact the parent with an interpreter from Language Line, as well as send translated information home to the parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. PS 195 will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by sending an internal letter to each staff member reminding them of their responsibility to communicate with LEP parents, and what resources are available to them. Each staff member will have the Language Identification Guide as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit brochure. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 64  PS 195Q will fulfill parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, by posting the availability of interpretation services signs in each of the school's covered languages near the primary entrance of the school, and by including procedures for accessibility to the administrative office for parents who are in need of language access services in the school safety plan. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 195 uses parent surveys, PTA meetings, and parent/teacher meetings throughout the school year to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. These surveys will be translated in-house by our staff in French, Spanish, or Haitian Creole. All other languages indicated in the BIOU report will by translated by our contracted DOE provider. 2018-19 CEP 65 
