2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q202 School Name: J.H.S. 202 ROBERT H. GODDARD Principal: WILLIAM FITZGERALD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert H. Goddard MS202 27Q202 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 342700010202 6-8 138-30 Lafayette street 718 848 0001 School Number (DBN): 718 848 8082 Fax: Kelly Barton Kbarton3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: William Fitzgerald Barbara Meenan Grace DiNicolantonio AntonellaTheodosiou SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Cascio 0 0 Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. JAmbert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-515-3543 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name William Fitzgerald Barbara Meenan GraceDiNicolantonio Melissa Cascio N/A Homwattie Habib Carin Chiang David Aaron Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Cheri Jackson AntonellaTheodosiou Elizabeth Lewis Mary Lewis Lisa Ferrato Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Robert H. Goddard Middle School (MS 202) is to provide all students with a comprehensive education with a particular emphasis on the Fine Arts (Band, Chorus, Visual Arts and Theater), so they are able to view the world through a holistic lens and be well prepared to greet the various challenges of college and career, as intrinsically motivated, socially conscious, and inspired individuals. This goal will be accomplished by providing all students with rigorous instruction through the Common Core Standards driven lessons, developing and retaining highly effective teachers, infusing cutting edge technology into 2018-19 CEP 9  every classroom, as well as, advancing equity and inclusion for all students which will be made possible by a shared philosophy through a cultivated and vested partnership with all the stakeholders in the school community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. MS 202 is a middle school in Ozone Park, Queens with 1,100 students, serving grades 6-8. The school’s population is comprised of 47.09% Hispanic, 4.43% Native American, 32.36% Asian, 1.36% Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, 7.81% Black, 6.18% White and .72% Multi-Racial. The student body also includes 16.73% Special Education students and 7.18% English Language Learners. Boys account for 49.72% of the students enrolled, while girls account for 50.27%. The average attendance rate for the school for SY 2016-2017 was 95.2% and average class size is 30 students. MS 202’s mission is to prepare our students for the rigorous demands of the academic and work worlds, so they may reach their potential as self-directed, creative and socially aware individuals. To this end, we offer a program complimented by our implementation of technology (Promethean boards, IPads, Chromebooks, Laptops, Document cameras), in addition to our utilization of the Second Step program to expand Social Emotional Learning and our expanding Arts program, which includes, visual arts, band, chorus and drama. Our goal is to provide a rigorous, challenging, creative, and comprehensive education which best supports our students during, what can be best described as, a very critical and pivotal time in their lives. Our ultimate goal is to create adept, autonomous, responsible and reflective individuals who are prepared to take on the rigors of high school, college and eventually, a career. To support these goals, we have established partnerships with St. John’s University through College Access for All, SAYA! (South Asian Youth Action), which is an after school program that serves many of our students, and the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), which enables us to pilot programs like APTT (Academic Parent Teacher Teams) to increase Parent Involvement, College Access for All builds college-consciousness in our seventh grade students to support better decision making in grade eight through high school; and since we are a Title 1 school, SAYA! affords many of students the necessary after school support they need in the areas of homework help, while providing extra-curricular activities such as soccer, coding, and even violin. Teacher pedagogy is strengthened through our instructional coaches and content area lead team. As a result of collaboration with this team and administration, our professional learning plan is tailored to meet individual and departmental needs to support continued student achievement. As a result of our expanding Arts programs, our students are fortunate enough to showcase their talent at Queens College, as well as Carnegie Hall as participants of an honors band program, our Visual Arts students have won the Queens Borough Arts Festival two years in a row, resulting in the winning pieces being displayed at the Queens Museum. This early exposure to premier Fine Arts experiences elevates their confidence and leaves an indelible mark in their middle school memory. Finally, through our school's participation in the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), one of our eighth grade students had her work published in the MSQI journal, because of her excellence in writing about Social Justice and Equality. In 2017-18, the number of students attaining proficiency on both the New York State English Language Arts and the New York State Math exams increased, an increase of 11.8% for ELA and 5% for math. To keep with this momentum of improvement, our English Language Arts department continues to utilize Kylene Beers' Notice and Note reading strategies and work with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) literacy-based program. The English Language Arts department will also introduce a new writing curriculum, Educating Powerful Writers, through the use of backward design planning and the Literacy Design Collaborative (LDC). To continue the constant goal of moving more students to a proficient or mastery level in math, the math department is migrating to a new, highly rated curriculum, Illustrative Math. This is a task-driven program that is designed to cultivate problem solving skills and perseverance. We will continue with the additional instructional time as supported by Algebra for All, using a portion of the time for "personal learning" periods, allowing teachers to act as AIS providers to each of their own students to better build the foundations needed to be successful in a rigorous curriculum such as Illustrative Math. Our involvement with Algebra 2018-19 CEP 10  for All (A4A) continues to grow with 50% of our department having been trained through A4A by the beginning of the 2018-19 school year. We will also continue to build capacity within the department with external A4A coaching support and utilizing our already trained staff on Monday professional learning time. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL- language acquisition, Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL, LDC SWD- Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL, LDC Lowest Third- Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL, LDC 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The staff at MS 202 historically score well during Principal Performance Observations (PPO's) in areas regarding teacher teams and teacher collaboration. To continue this performance, we will continue to focus on Collaborative Teaching from the Framework for Great Schools as well as Rigorous Instruction and School Leadership in the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q202 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1097 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 63 25 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 19 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 73.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.6% 46.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.21 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 52.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 103 101 14 94.6% 6.4% 15.1% 7.4% 34.1% 5.1% 6 30% 7 36.9% 55% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES YES NO N/A NO NO N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on the results of the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, staff scored Rigorous Instruction positively at 4.37, 0.30 higher than the district average and 0.68 higher than the city average. 2. While improved for the 2017-2018 school year, only one-third of our student population attained a level of proficiency on the NYS Math Exam (excluding the students that took the Algebra I Regents). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, teachers will develop rigorous instruction in Mathematics as measured by a 5% increase in student achievement in grades 6-8 as measured by Common Core aligned performance-based assessment, Edperformance. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math teachers will work in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) through teacher teams to ensure alignment of the new curriculum, Illustrative Math, to the rigors of the Common Core. SWDs will be supported through the use of digital curriculum, which can be accessed online; there is a digital glossary for all students to reference. Activities for this curriculum are interactive with multiple entry points, so it will suit the needs of all learners. Teachers' execution of this new program is supported by the training received through Algebra for All and internal support through the Algebra for All Plus Grant. Instruction and new curriculum resources will be differentiated and aligned to the needs of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) through our work with Albegra for All and internal coaching with Generation Ready and then closely monitored for progress and revised when necessary through our Datawise inquiry process. Parents will be kept informed of teacher practice, curriculum and testing by utilizing Tuesday’s parent involvement time, MSQI's Academic Parent-Teacher Teams (APTT), Skedula, School Website, School Messenger, letters, emails and phone calls, applying translation resources where necessary. Teachers will incorporate Wordgen from MSQI, in all content areas across the grades to ensure adequate academic vocabulary acquisition. Each week, students and teachers will be introduced to five new words, and they will be implemented across the curriculum and by subject area. This portion of the curriculum be accessed online through the Serp Institute and/or through the use of paper copies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Math Coach, Math Teachers ENLs, SWDs September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers Parents, ENL parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Coaches, All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administration, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Middle School Quality Initiative's (MSQI) APTT Initiative (continuation in grade 6, new roll out in grade 7), Parent Involvement Tuesday's and Student-led Conferences (all teachers September-June), SLT (monthly), PTA (monthly), 2018-19 CEP 14  Parent-Teacher Conferences (4x a year), School Messenger (as needed), Skedula (full parent access 24/7), Letters home (when needed), School website (routinely updated). Stakeholders Involved: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Deans, Parent Coordinator, Parent-Teacher Association (PTA), Parents, and Students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Professional learning time (80 minutes), Wednesday morning professional time (35 minutes), weekly common planning, departmentalization, per session opportunities for teachers, workshops , Illustrative Math curriculum, Algebra for All, Educating Powerful Writers, MSQI, Wordgen, Myon, Wilson, Just Words, STARI, Passport to Social Studies , Gateway for ENL, Brainpop and Brainpop English as a Second Language (ESL), technology to support programs, College Access for All. Teachers will meet in grade level and cross functional teams to review data and leverage resources to support student achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Beginning of Year (BOY) assessments (EdPerformance Series) will be administered in September 2018 to establish baselines. This assessment will be administered again at the mid-year point, February 2019, expecting a 2.5% increase in student achievement. The End of Year (EOY) assessment will be administered in the window of May-June 2019 where a total 5% increase in student achievement is expected. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Edperformance Series for Math, Data Driven Classroom (DDC), Inquiry Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. MS 202's strengths have included a strong commitment to student safety including: Social-emotional Learning for students and educators, Anti Bullying boxes, Anti Bullying assemblies, LYFEspace trained counselors, Restorative trained counselors, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) trained counselors, Surveillance cameras, Violence Prevention Grant a) Creative Connections, b) Leadership Program; SAYA! After school Program. For the 2018-2019 academic year, we have invested in a social-emotional learning program, Second Step, and have programmed every student for 1 period of Social Emotional Learning each week. With the implementation of Social Emotional Learning (SEL), all students and educators will be educated on how to activate their Growth Mindsets, which will encourage higher self-esteem and higher achievement and success. 2. As per the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey (LES), 43% of students feel bullying doesn't or rarely occurs, which is 8% lower than the district and 6% lower than the city. In order to improve positive feelings amongst our students, we have invested in Second Step, a Social Emotional Learning curriculum. The entire student body will be provided with SEL classes one period per week. 3. We have 3 guidance counselors and deans, one for each grade. Every class is scheduled for one SEL period a week. We also have 6R programs where students have the opportunity to work with teachers in small groups. Weekly advisory periods, splitting the grade to manage the size of the audience where presentations tailored to the emotional needs of the pre-adolescent and adolescent child. We host competitive sports between schools where the student body gets the opportunity to support their peers and school. We have staff-student activities to build strong relationships in a non-academic setting. We host in-school and after-school dances where staff volunteer to chaperon. We have before and after-school clubs based on student interest and the SAYA program to support students and the schedule of parents. Through MSQI, we use the APTT initiative to foster better relationships with parents/guardians to support the academic growth of the child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, all stakeholders will take a proactive approach to the social-emotional learning (SEL) of students and their overall well-being using the Second Step program resulting in a 10% increase in student responses on an internal survey that incorporates NYC Learning Environment Survey student questions. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Programming all students for one period of SEL each week, using the program Second Step. Students Having Grade Deans and Grade Counselors available for student mediation and conflict resolution, who are trained in Lyfespace, Restorative Circles and TCIS. Mandated 1:1 or small group counseling for identified SWD's and At-risk counseling for any student presenting need including SWD's and ENL's. Students Providing staff with social-emotional professional learning opportunities during the 80-minute professional time on Monday afternoons. Teachers Conducting weekly grade assemblies to discuss how to resolve conflict peacefully without engaging in harassing, intimidating or bullying behavior. Strategically selecting students, those that participate or are targeted, inclusive if SWD's and ENL's, to participate in teacher run mentoring periods. Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Deans, Guidance, Teachers Administration, Deans, Guidance Administration, Deans, Guidance, Instructional Coaches Administration Deans, Guidance , School safety 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. MSQI's APTT Initiative (continuation with grade 6, grade 7 roll out), Parent Involvement Tuesday's and Student-led Conferences (all teachers September-June), School Leadership Team (monthly), PTA (monthly), Parent-Teacher Conferecnce (4x a year), School Messenger (as needed), Skedula (full parent access 24/7), Letters home (when needed), School website (routinely updated). Stakeholder Involved: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Deans, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Parents, and Students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  Second Step- SEL Program; Weekly circular 6R professional periods, Monday Professional learning time (80 minutes); Wednesday morning professional time (35 minutes); Weekly common planning, departmentalization; Per session opportunities for teachers; Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in student responses on an internal survey that incorporates LES questions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal survey that includes LES questions, Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey results indicate that 99% of teachers agreed or agreed strongly that teachers design instructional programs together; 99% of teachers agreed or agreed strongly that teachers talk with one another about instruction. On our most recent PPO visits, January 25, 2018 and May 16, 2018, we were observed "effective or highly effective" in the Quality Review rubric component 4.2 citing it as an area of celebration, "The principal and teachers have built a culture of professional collaboration through inter-visitation, model classrooms, and study groups, in which they share insights relative to the coherence of teacher pedagogy." 2. According to 2017-2018 ADVANCE data, while a large majority of our staff was rated effective in Danielson component 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques, we would like to see a migration of ratings to highly effective. And based on the 2018 LES, 49% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions and only 57% feel challenged in class. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all collaborative teacher teams will have completed purposeful Inquiry cycles aligned to MS 202’s shared vision, incorporating NYS assessment data and internal benchmark data where instruction will be tailored and monitored resulting in a 10% increase in the average Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) of teachers in Danielson Component 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques as measured by ADVANCE ratings during the 2018-2019 academic year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Data Wise Inquiry Process, Common planning and Wednesday professional time to support cycle work, DDC to track assessment results, Mondays differentiated PLOs Teachers and Students September 2018-June 2019 Middle School Quality Initiative- Wordgen in all content areas throughout the grades to build academic vocabulary acquisition; Wilson, Just Words, STARI for academic intervention; Educating Powerful Writers; continued work with Kylene Beer's "Notice and Note" Students September 2018-June 2019 Illustrative Math curriculum; Algebra for All; Task-driven lessons with real-world application, multiple entry points, problem-solving based, that build perseverance; Scheduled personal learning periods Teachers and Students September 2018-June 2019 MSQI's APTT Initiative, Parent Involvement Tuesday's and Student-led Conferences, SLT, PTA, School Messenger, Skedula, Letters home, School website Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Coaches, Leads teachers Administration, Instructional Coaches, Leads teachers Administration, Instructional Coaches, Leads teachers Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MSQI's APTT Initiative (continuation in grade 6, grade 7 roll out), Parent Involvement Tuesday's and Student-led Conferences (all teachers September-June), SLT (monthly), PTA (monthly), Parent-Teacher Conferecnce (4x a year), School Messenger (as needed), Skedula (full parent access 24/7), Letters home (when needed), School website (routinely updated). Stakeholder Involved: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Deans, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Parents, and Students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI, LDC, Educating Powerful Writers, Illustrative Math curriculum, Algebra for All, Data Wise, Lead Planning professional periods, Common planning, In-house Professional Learning Opportunities on 80 minute Mondays, 2018-19 CEP 20  External Professional Learning Opportunities when scheduled, per session opportunities starting in Summer 2018 and throughout 2018-2019 academic year, Instructional coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the average Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) of teachers in Danielson Component 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques as measured by ADVANCE ratings during the 2018-2019 academic year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE school average of 3b; DDC results for Inquiry cycles Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. At the close of the 2017-2018 academic year, MS 202 had 15% of teachers rated overall as highly effective and 85% being effective. Through the close collaboration of administration with instructional coaches, lead teachers, and the School Development Committee, professional learning on Mondays has become differentiated for specific teacher needs based on building and department initiatives, teacher self-evaluation through surveys and ADVANCE observations. 2. Based on our 2017-2018 Principal's Performance Observation results, we need to improve the language of our learning objectives making instructional expectations for students clear and conducting instructional rounds within the administrative team so we are all delivering the same messages and expectations to teachers bringing clarity to their planning and instruction, to be measured by a higher MoTP average in Danielson Component 3c: Engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, leadership, along with instructional coaches, will plan targeted professional learning opportunities on engaging students in learning using data from classroom observations that will result in a 10% increase in the average Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) of teachers for Danielson Component 3c- Engagement as measured by ADVANCE ratings during the 2018-2019 academic year. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through the observation process and the Danielson Framework, school administration will identify teachers’ strengths and needs areas in order to provide specific feedback and support for improvement Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Coaches (Instructional Leads) will provide targeted support to teachers identified as developing or ineffective through 1:1 coaching, and support for staff at large through Monday Professional Learning Opportunities. ENL teachers and Special Education teachers will meet regularly to discuss best practices and identify strategies to improve practice using the LDC model. PLO's will be made available to further develop these teachers. Chosen leads from each area will provide professional learning for all teachers so to support meeting the needs of these students in all content areas. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Coaches Teachers, ENL and SWD students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Coaches, Lead teachers Parent meetings and workshops will be provided to familiarize parents with different programs and instruction. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MSQI's APTT Initiative (continuation in grade 6, grade 7 roll out), Parent Involvement Tuesday's and Student-led Conferences (all teachers September-June), SLT (monthly), PTA (monthly), Parent-Teacher Conferecnce (4x a year), School Messenger (as needed), Skedula (full parent access 24/7), Letters home (when needed), School website (routinely updated). Stakeholder Involved: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Deans, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Parents, and Students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cabinet meetings (daily), Instructional rounds with administrative team, Coach meetings (weekly), Observations with timely and specific feedback (at least 3-6 times a year depending on selection), Common Planning (weekly), Wednesday professional time (weekly), Professional learning opportunities (in-house- 80 Minute Mondays), External 2018-19 CEP 23  professional learning opportunities (when available September 2018- June 2019), Per session professional learning opportunities (Summer 2018- June 2019), Inter-visitations/Open-classrooms (weekly), MSQI, Wordgen, Wilson, Just Words, STARI, Educating Powerful Writers, Myon, Illustrative Math curriculum, Algebra for All, Professional learning support for Illustrative Math, CMP3, Passport to Social Studies, MSQI APTT Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the average Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) of teachers for Danielson Component 3c- Engagement as measured by ADVANCE ratings during the 2018-2019 academic year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE data school average of 3c Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. MS 202 is strong in offering parents/guardians scheduled time to come to the school to engage in different opportunities for involvement in the education of their student. The Parent Coordinator has been instrumental in establishing a greater turnout, on average 80-100 people, for informative, monthly meetings, which highlight MS 202's Students of the Month; and the occasional meeting with attendance as high as 150. The PC has also held different meetings and community-minded workshops, including topics such as "Social Media Awareness", "Cyber-safety", "Dangerous Apps", that have regularly resulted in 12-15 parents/guardians attendance, but as high as 40. Continuing into our second year with MS 202's presence in social media, with the PC managing our Facebook page, we are currently up to 248 followers. Included in one of the four Parent-Teacher conference nights, MS 202 uses the September Back-to-School night to inform parents/guardians of upcoming events and provide them the experience of traveling through the building as a "day in the life" of their child, following a shortened version of their schedule. We also have an annual Blooming Arts Festivals, concerts throughout the academic year, plays from our drama department, and Holiday shows allowing the students of our school to showcase their high caliber talent. MS 202 has always maintained constant contact with parents/guardians via different channels of communication, including Skedula with 66% school-wide parent enrollment and 95% student enrollment by June of 2018, School Messenger, School website, email, letters home and phone calls, and more recently through Student-led conferences on Tuesday Parent Engagement time. 2. In the 2017-2018 academic year, 50% of our student population engaged in at least one student-led conference in some content area. Our average MSQI APTT participation for the 2017-2018 school year was 67%. By expanding the MSQI APTT Initiative into grade 7, our goal is to increase the number of families participating in student-led conferences and APTT meetings by 20%, as measured by MS 202' Google document that is populated by teachers and tracks family involvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MS202 will improve family and parent involvement in the school community as evident by a 10% increase in attendance at Student-Led conferences and participation Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? MSQI's APTT Initiative is being continued in the sixth grade and expanding into the seventh; the initiative will provide point teachers with training to build partnerships with parents/guardians, providing them with resources for parents to assist their students in academics at home. Parents and Students September 2018-June 2019 Leveraging Tuesday Parent Engagement time to access more parents to engage in Student-led Conferences. Parents and Students Restructuring how the four contractual Parent-Teacher conferences are typically led to fit the Student-led conference model to meet the scheduling needs of working parents. Implementing data-based parent conferences through MSQI's APPT; encouraging and allowing parents opportunity to sign up for Pupil Path to have real time access to their students' performance and current data. Parents and Students Parents and Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Grade 6 and 7 teachers, Parent Coordinator Administration, Teachers Administration, Teachers , Parent Coordinator Administration, Teachers , Parents, Students, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. MSQI's APTT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI's APTT, per session professional learning opportunities that support the MSQI initiative, Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Parent-Teacher Conferences, DRP, Edperformance, Skedula, Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 5% increase in family participation in Student-led Conferences and APTT meetings as measured by teacher logs in a school-wide shared Google doc form and APTT sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Shared Google docs which documents tracking family participation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assistant principals, Teachers, and Guidance will meet to identify students at level 2 or low 3 based on their NYSELAexams, re-evaluating their progessthrough DRPresults. For grade 7 and 8 students, teachers can confer with students past teachers to evaluate whether state test data is reflective of their classroom performance. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Student placement: Self-contained, ICT, GE, ENL class, ARP, Regentsclass SETSS At-risk SETSS Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Teacher-Studentratio, Para-professional assignment, purposeful grouping in class, differentiated instruction based on student needs Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Beginning of the Year (reviewed throughout academic year) Beginning of the Year (reviewed throughout academic year) Throughout the academic year based on RTIand/or PPT Reviewed after every trimester Small group instruction, Pull-2018-19 CEP 28  Mathematics Assistant principals, Teachers, and Guidance will meet to identify students at level 2 or low 3 based on theirNYSMathexams, re-evaluating Pull out by AISprovider Circular 6R AIS ENL Saturday Academy Before-school/After-school Extra-help Saturday Test-prep Academy Student placement: Self-contained,ICT, out of encore subjects Scheduled in teacher programs, studentselection is reviewed after every trimester Small group by grade, language acquisition focus January-April 2019 Small group instruction focusing on fundamental skills to support application in class January-April 2019 Small group instruction focusing on key skills in reading comprehension and written expression Post February break-April 2019 Teacher-Studentratio,Para-professional assignment, Beginning of the Year (reviewed 2018-19 CEP 29  theirprogessthroughEdperformanceresults. For grade 7 and 8 students, teachers can confer with students past teachers to evaluate whether state test data is reflective of their classroom performance. GE, ENL class,ARP, Regentsclass SETSS At-riskSETSS Scheduled 2 "personal learning" periods for each servicing every student Circular 6RAIS purposeful grouping in class, differentiated instruction based on student needs Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects throughout academic year) Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Beginning of the Year (reviewed throughout academic year) Throughout the academic year based onRTIand/orPPT September-June 2019 Reviewed after every trimester Small group instruction, individualized content based on needs Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Small group instruction focusing on fundamental skills 2018-19 CEP 30  to support application in class Smallgroup instruction focusing on "major" domains in the CCLS Before-school/After-school Extra-help Saturday Test-prep Academy Science Teachers meet in PLCs to analyze their students' NYSELAexam results and correlating that to past science performancetrends on the NYSGrade 8 Exam and Earth Science Regents to identify students that would perform at a level 2 or low 3. Student placement: Self-contained,ICT, GE, ENL class,ARP, Regentsclass In-class small-group instruction Teacher-Studentratio,Para-professional assignment, purposeful grouping in class, differentiated instruction based on student needs Students supported with Inquiry -based and Project-based instruction with multiple entry points; effective DOKquestioning techniques to facilitate productive accountable discussion, use of technology and Scheduled in teacher programs, studentselection is reviewed after every trimester January-April 2019 Post February break-April 2019 Beginning of the Year (reviewed throughout academic year) Throughout the academic year 2018-19 CEP 31  programs such as Boardworksas differentiation tools Small group instruction focusing on grade 8 students taking the NYSScience exam, Pull-out of encore subjects Small group instruction focusing on grade 8 students taking theNYSScience exam or Earth Science Regents Throughout the academic year Third trimester Circular 6R AIS Before and after school support 2018-19 CEP 32  Social Studies Teachers meet inPLCsto analyze their students'NYSELAexam results and correlating that to their past social studies performanceto identify students that would perform at a level 2 or low 3. Student placement: Self-contained,ICT, GE, ENL class,ARP, Regentsclass In-class small-group instruction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Based on students discussed atPPTmeetings for RTI, students will be selected on an as needed basis by Assistant Principal, SBST, Guidance, Referring Teachers, AISproviders Individual counseling or Group counseling Teacher-Studentratio,Para-professional assignment, purposeful grouping in class, differentiated instruction based on student needs Students supported with a new curriculum that has document-based and project-based instruction with reading that has multiple entry points that leverage expository text strategies; writing supports through 4-square writing techniques; DOKquestioning techniques to facilitate productive accountable discussion, debate opportunities embedded in Wordgen Schedule time with guidance counselors trained inLifespacecrisis Intervention, Peer mediation, Conflict resolution, push-in guidance lessons Beginning of the Year (reviewed throughout academic year) Throughout the academic year Throughout the academic year based on student need 2018-19 CEP 33  At-risk SETSS Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Small group instruction, Pull-out of encore subjects Throughout the academic year 2018-19 CEP 34 Throughout the academic year based on student need September-June 2019 Throughout the academic year based on student need Whole class instruction Small group mentoring giving student opportunity for their voice to be heard in a non-academic setting with teachers they trust, Pull-out of encore subjects Scheduled weekly SELperiods for all students: Second Step program Circular 6R Student Mentoring  Circular 6R AIS based on student need 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Free breakfast and lunch, Metrocards, supplies, and counseling, Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. MS 202 has developed a hiring process that includes an initial interview with a hiring committee followed by a scheduled demo-lesson to be observed by at least two of the committee members. Committee member selections then get forwarded to the principal for a check of references. A position is not offered unless a prospective employee has successfully completed all steps of the process. MS 202's committee replaces educators that were currently teaching out of license and retire or choose to leave with only licensed professionals. Programming decisions are made yearly to reduce the number of teacher that would be considered not HQT. MS 202 has an ongoing partnership with nearby Colleges (e.g. Queens College) to allow student teachers to intern and determine if qualified for a future opening/position Instructional coaches and selected lead teachers have completed the NYC mentoring course and are assigned to mentor new teachers and support struggling teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). INTERNAL PROFESSIONAL LEARNING: Professional development team that includes administration and instructional coaches (weekly meetings), department leads inclusive of deans and guidance (regular touch points with instructional coaches and direct supervisors), as well as input from all staff (through internal surveys) 2018-19 CEP 38  Conduct a building needs assessment based on SCEP goals, NYS exam data, NYC Initiatives, ADVANCE data. internal surveys Plan of Action: Prioritize for professional learning so that all departments and teaching staff have the opportunity to improve pedagogy and by extension increase student achievement Monthly School development Committee meetings to assess previous professional learning opportunities and plan for future sessions To assess and plan beyond the SDC, we use quarterly professional learning reflections and professional learning preference surveys, review ADVANCE data after rounds of observations to further plan professional learning Mid-year checkpoints with department benchmarks More frequent Inquiry cycle assessments that yield more specific data to identify successful strategies to be shared through professional learning time with "Teachers Teaching Teachers" Inter-visitation, open-classroom, and study groups support and reinforce professional learning topics by affording the teachers opportunities to observe strategies in real time or receive one on one support from a colleague EXTERNAL PROFESSIONAL LEARNING: MSQI (Wordgen, Debate, Wilson, Just Words, APTT, internal coaching support) Teachers Writing College Algebra for All (with internal coaching support) Metamorphosis training through "My Brothers Keeper" Grant FSC Promethean Board 2018-19 CEP 39  Myon Achieve 3000 Violence Prevention Grant Passport for Social Studies Algebra Nation LDC Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers in each department, collaboratively created common unit exams. The focus for Inquiry cycles is decided upon by the results of common assessments and teams collectively create or choose and plan for formative assessment opportunities throughout the cycle to assess strategies used to close achievement gaps. Strategies and 2018-19 CEP 40  ways of assessing their success are then shared with other teams through Monday Professional Learning time during "Teachers Teaching Teachers". 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 534,512.00 0 12,366.00 0 6,448,322.00 X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5c, 5d, 6 5a, 5c, 5d, 6 5a, 5c, 5d, 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 41   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Statement of Parent Involvement Policy Robert H. Goddard Middle School 202 MS 202 Queens is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school and community. We have identified key areas that contribute to a partnership that supports greater student achievement. We at, MS 202, believe that our families and community are key to student achievement and the success of our school. In order to meet the school's goals we need the input in decision making throughout the school year. Parents/guardians can contribute by participating in the following opportunities: A) When schedules permit, attend the following scheduled meetings: Monthly School Leadership meetings and PTA meetings, Monthly Title 1 Parent Involvement Meetings, 4 Annual Parent-teacher conferences, Weekly Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Monthly Parent Workshops (Curriculum Information, Health related services, etc...) B) When schedules permit, participate/volunteer in student and school celebrations such as: Winter and Spring Music Festivals, Spring Blooming Arts Festivals, Winter and Spring Dances, Career Day, ARISTA, MS 202 sporting events, Monthly Student of the Month/Citizenship Awards, Quarterly 100% Attendance celebrations and Awards Ceremonies and celebrations at the end of the school year. C) Keeping open lines of communication through: Participation in Student-led conferences, Participation in MSQI's APTT initiative, forming goal oriented partnerships, Routinely monitoring student progress in all classes through Skedula, Contacting teachers with any concerns or pertinent information regarding students through NYCDOE email, Skedula, or phone calls, School website, Backpack notices, monthly newsletter, school newspaper, Individualized student daily reports, Independently scheduled meetings (in-person or by phone) to accommodate working parent schedules, translation services 2018-19 CEP 43  D) When needed, taking advantage of supports provided for students: Early morning AIS opportunities, Saturday ENL Academy, Saturday Test-prep Academy, SAYA After-school camp, After-school sports and clubs Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students We will join parents to provide for the health, and safety of our children, and in the maintenance of a home environment that encourages learning and positive behavior in schools. We will also provide training and information to help families understand their children’s development and how to support the changes the children undergo. We will reach out to provide parents with information about school programs and student progress. This will include phone calls, report cards, parent conferences, progress reports, fliers, newsletters, and pamphlets. Additional communication will be in a form that families find understandable and useful (Skedula, School Messenger, Facebook, (https://www.facebook.com/GoddardMS202 and the MS 202 Website: (http://schools.nyc.gov/schoolportals/27/q202/default.htm ) . With the guidance and support of the school, family members can assist their children with homework and other school related activities. Our school will encourage parents to join in learning activities at home (library cards, home reading, Parent Teacher Association (PTA) resource centers, book sales, following directions, etc… We will help parents gain access to support services by other agencies, such as health care, governmental services, Supplemental Educational Services (SES), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and childcare programs. When necessary, we will have translators or translated resources available, so parents with limited English fluency can understand correspondence from the school and the proceedings at the PTA meetings. Additional accommodations will be available for parents with disabilities so they can also attend meetings. Through the efforts of the Parent Coordinator, the PTA President with Regional Support, an outreach will be made to parents of students in temporary housing (STH) so these families can be involved in parent/school activities. We will hold Student of the Month celebrations in conjunction with the PTA meetings and Student Recognition Celebrations each quarter. 2018-19 CEP 44  Two weeks prior to the start of the month, we will distribute the school calendar, informing parents of upcoming school events. We will also have a bi-monthly newsletter. We will hold Saturday English New Language (ENL) and computer workshops to aid in educating parents. We will hold early morning academic intervention for struggling learners We will offer Saturday test-prep classes mid-year to support student achievement on NYS exams. We will offer an after school camp through SAYA! that also provides homework assistance. At our Open House, the parents of English New Language learners/Limited Proficiency (ENL/LEP) students will receive an orientation session on state standards assessment programs, school expectations, and general program requirements for bilingual education and/or free standing ESL programs. Aside from the parent representation on the School Leadership team, we will assist parents in having meaningful roles in the school decision making process through PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences and surveys. The school will provide parents with training and information so they can maximize this opportunity. Parental Involvement and School Quality The Parent Coordinator serves as a conduit for parents who cannot attend Leadership or PTA meetings through phone calls and email, so there voices are heard in school decision making. Through MSQI's APTT Initiative, we will partner with parents where collaboratively goals are set for their students and resources are given to parents to support movement towards those goals at home as teachers design instruction to move them toward their individualized goals at school. Parents will be invited to participate in Student-Led conferences where their child gets to showcase success in different content areas. 2018-19 CEP 45  The Arts department will host several concerts/festivals to invite parents to celebrate the talents of the students at MS 202. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parent workshops will focus on basic educational concerns, student updates, relevant workshops, and new school initiatives. Professional Development: Parents can make significant contributions to the school environment and functioning of the school. Our school will encourage parent volunteerism and make every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. Parent workshops are provided by professionals monthly in the areas of health, school curriculum, assessment, and other family matters concerning social and educational issues. Professional Development is provided for parents on the School Leadership Team (SLT) in order to assist the team members in making informed decision regarding school matters. 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Individually scheduled in-person meetings/phone meetings with teachers during and after the school day to accommodate working parent schedules. ENL Professional Development: Regional monthly ENL/Bilingual professional development will be made available to all parents of ENLs. Parents will be afforded the opportunity to learn about NYS-ENL standards, instructional strategies and NYS and NYC assessments given to their children. Annual evaluation of the Parent Involvement Policy Robert H. Goddard MS 202 Queens Parent Compact-Title 1 School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS202 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: 1. High-quality Curriculum: At MS 202, our teachers are constantly improving pedagogy through professional learning maximizing the benefits of the most current and valuable initiatives related to curriculum to improve student achievement. Our ELA department is being supported by the Middle School Quality Initiative, are implementing a new writing curriculum, Educating Powerful Writers, and have implemented the fiction and non-fiction strategies of Notice and Note by Kylene Beers. Our Math department is migrating to the highly rated curriculum, Illustrative Math, and 2018-19 CEP 46  will continue to supplement resources that foster problem solving and perseverance through the Algebra for All initiative, professional learning from Metamorphosis and C-King education, and specialized ENL training in math instruction under the guise of Ann Shannon and Miguel Cordero. We have also incorporated 2 periods weekly of "personal learning" to assist math teachers in addressing the individualized needs of each student. Our Social Studies department is investing in the most current Passport to Social Studies Curriculum. The Regents department is growing at MS 202, offering more classes than ever access to the Earth science Regents (7) and Algebra I Regents (3). All planning and instruction is data driven, using a range of assessments from large scale exams to a daily exit ticket. Such information is used to differentiate to give students of all level an access point to attain knowledge. 2. Parent Support: Parents can support their students in numerous ways. They have access to Skedula for real-time data as to how their student is doing in every class. Parents can monitor their child's homework completion and work with students to keep up with this responsibility which reinforces their classroom instruction. Parents can contact teachers with any concerns or information they may feel is pertinent to their child's academic success through teacher DOE emails, Skedula, and/or phone calls. Parents should attend the four Parent-Teacher conferences and make time in their schedule to participate in their child's student-led conference. Sixth grade parents will have the opportunity to form partnerships with teachers and students through the APTT initiative under MSQI. Parents can attend monthly School Leadership Meeting and PTA meetings. Parents can volunteer time at MS 202 at concerts and festivals or Career Day where they can showcase their own talents. 3. Communication: There are 4 contractual Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Parent Engagement time, which at MS 202 is primarily used to host Student-Led conferences, Individually scheduled parent meeting (in-person or via phone), Skedula, DOE email, School messenger, Facebook, phone calls, Parent Coordinator, backpack notices I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum MS202 Queens will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: By late fall, the School Leadership Team will review the current school and district Comprehensive Educational Plans and begin to identify preliminary priorities for the following year. They will consult the school’s stakeholders about those preliminary priorities and assess additional needs By early spring, the School Leadership Team will have completed a thorough assessment using a review of the NYC school survey and all available data, to evaluate the effectiveness of current strategies in meeting the needs of students to inform the development of the next year’s Comprehensive Educational Plan and budget The Parent Coordinator together with the PTA will hold workshops to explain curriculum and standards, and to stress the importance of getting actively involved in their child’s education Parents will be encouraged to attend monthly School Leadership meetings and PTA meetings to be informed on the latest school business and have their concerns heard 2018-19 CEP 47  Through MSQI's APTT emphasis will be placed on the fact that parents as partners in education will influence student achievement in school and throughout life The school community will work collaboratively and cohesively to support learning and to determine the school’s educational direction-our vision, goals, priorities, and strategies to achieve that vision All parents will be strongly encouraged to attend Parent Teacher Conferences in order to develop a culture in which there is a shared goal for all children to achieve high levels of learning and a spirit of partnership among all stakeholders to achieve this goal All parents will be encourage to attend Student-led conferences to support their student's success and get a better understanding of their child's academic expectations I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Our Parent Coordinator will provide the necessary synchronization, technical assistance and other support in planning and implementing effective parent involvement activities. The Parent Coordinator will do the following: Serve as a problem solver, liaison and facilitator for parent and school community concerns and issues including, but limited to, school policies, facilities issues Conduct outreach to engage parents in their child’s education Convene regular parent meetings along with the Principal and Administration, where appropriate Work with the school’s Parent Association, where needed, to provide assistance in establishing by-laws, holding elections and conducting their affairs in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-660 Serve as a school liaison to Central parent and Regional parent support staff Maintain ongoing contact with community organizations that are involved with providing services to the school’s educational programs 2018-19 CEP 48  Organize back to school and other events to increase parent and community involvement and create a welcoming school environment for parents Provide information to parents on child abuse, crisis intervention, suicide prevention, health related issues, service agencies, reducing gang involvement and violence prevention Conduct workshops to instruct parents on they can assist their child at home with their homework Partner with the Academic Intervention Staff to explain standardized exams to parents at Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Coordinator meetings. Provide strategies for parents to assist their child in preparing by practicing for these exams Conduct outreach to engage parents in their child’s education I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 4 Parent-Teacher Conference per year Tuesday Parent Engagement time Student-led Conferences MSQI's APTT NYCDOE email Skedula Facebook Phone outreach Individually scheduled in-person and phone conferences to accommodate working schedules School Leadership meetings PTA meetings PM events such as concerts, dances, festivals etc... 2018-19 CEP 49  Individualized student daily reports School website I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Involve parents in the planning, review and improvement of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy, in an organized, ongoing and timely manner Involve parents in the joint development of any School-Wide Program Plan (SWP Schools), in an organized, ongoing and timely manner Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title 1, Part A programs, and to explain the Title 1, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title 1, Part A programs. The school will hold the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parent involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so as to maximize attendance. The school will also invite all parents to this meeting and encourage them to attend Provide information to the parents of all students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the requests of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent possible, in a language that parents can understand Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner regarding Title 1, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure a child’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as reasonably possible Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessments in Math and English Language Arts Provide each parent with the opportunity (ies) to attend a scheduled Student-led conference or partner with the school community through the MSQI APTT initiative 2018-19 CEP 50  Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of Title 1 MS202 Queens will take the following action to involve parents in the joint development of its School Parent Involvement Plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: Parents and school staff will meet to develop the Parent Involvement Plan Parent Coordinators facilitate parent involvement activities in collaboration with the Parents’ Association At the regional level, the Office of Parent Support monitors all parent involvement activities A comprehensive range of opportunities for parents to become informed, in a timely manner regarding how the program will be designed, operated and evaluated will be established After consultation with and review by parents, a written plan will be established to ensure parents are involved in the planning, design and implementation of programs The school will provide such reasonable support for parent involvement activities as parents may request The School Leadership Team will be involved in the planning to involve parents All parents will be informed and invited to meetings to explain programs in an understandable, uniform format in a language the parents can understand Monthly PAC and DAC meetings each of which will include discussions of programs to apprise parents of the activities that will be conducted and to solicit recommendations for change 2018-19 CEP 51  Parents will participate in school activities and school based announcements to keep parents informed of school events; These include Parent Association meetings, multicultural fairs, school assemblies, trips and other special events Funds (a minimum of 1%) may be provided for parent trips related to school and parent involvement activities School visits by parents to view school based programs and activities will be supported Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: Monitoring attendance Supporting teacher efforts by promoting good study habits Devoting time each night to read to child Monitoring homework assignment to determine they are completed consistently and regularly Monitoring the amount of television and Internet exposure the children have Monitoring the websites the children are frequenting Taking interest in child by attending child’s extracurricular activities (eg: play, talent show, etc…) Promoting positive use of child’s extracurricular time 2018-19 CEP 52  Staying informed about their child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or school district and responding accordingly and swiftly Supporting teachers and school Administration in their efforts to properly guide their children in the best manner possible by reinforcing consequences for negative behavior and rewarding positive behavior Serving, to the best extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title1 Part A representative on the School’s Improvement Team, the Title 1 Policy Advisory Committee, the district wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or any other school advisory or policy group Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. We will accomplish this by doing the following: Doing homework every night and asking for help as needed Completing all project or assignments in a timely fashion Studying for tests and quizzes for a reasonable time Paying attention to teachers as they are facilitating the class Participating in class discussions and engaging in accountable talk Reading a minimum of 30 minutes every day outside of school Giving my parents/guardians all notices and information received in a timely manner and responding accordingly Responding to teachers requests Adhering to all policies and rules set forward by the school 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-19 CEP 54 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: We invite all of our ELLs to attend a Saturday Academy program. There are currently 120 ELLs. There are 40 ELLs in 6th grade, 40 ELLs in 7th grade and 40 ELLs in 8th grade. In 6th grade there 0 entering, 5 emerging, 6 transitioning and 16 expanding ELLs and 13 commanding students. In 7th grade there are 4 entering, 4 emerging, 4 transitioning and 13 expanding ELLs and 15 commanding. In 8th grade there are 3 entering, 3 emerging, 7 transitioning and 14 expanding ELLs and 13 commanding. There are 2 SIFE students in 7th grade and 1 SIFE students in 8th grade. This program historically services approximately 35-50 of our ENL students. A supervisor oversees the program. There will be one supervisor who will be paid through the Title III program since there are no other programs on Saturdays. The supervisor arrives by 8:00 am and leaves at 1:00 pm to insure the safe arrival and departure of students. The supervisor serves the breakfast and lunch and provides food services with the accountability numbers of meals served, as the meals are free from school food services.The Saturday Academy runs for 9 sessions, beginning 1/5/19 and runs as follows: 01/12/19, 01/26/19, 2/2/19, 2/9/19, 3/2/19, 3/9/19, 3/16/19, 3/23/19. The direct instruction will consist of two hours of academic work with the ENL and ELA teacher servicing 20 students, while the second group of 20 students will be serviced by one hour of technology and one hour of physical education. Then the groups will rotate having the direct instruction of academics with the ELA and ENL teacher servicing the twenty students that were in technology and physical education. The students will be grouped according to their level; Entering & Emerging and Transitioning & Expanding students. The ENL instruction will be provided by the certified ENL teacher who employ ENL strategies and techniques.The certified ELA teacher will teach in the content area of Language Arts. The two teachers will be team teaching. The certified ENL teacher will be a continued resource for the ELA teacher throughout the year. The ENL teacher will demonstrate ENL best practices and strategies with the ELA teacher to differentiate instruction for ELLs. English is the language of instruction. The Saturday program activities will support these students to become better readers, writers, listeners and speakers in their general education and 2018-19 CEP 56  The ELA teacher also services a grade 6 ENL class that is self-contained. Therefore her one special education ( with an AED certification for the physical education portion) and Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information or special education classes. Language development will be increased and assessed through the students' use of vocabulary as integrated into content areas through the use of technology and word to word glossaries. The teaching materials will include a range of print, visuals, manipulative and digital resources, including the SEL library provided by the DOE. The program begins at 8:00 am for breakfast, instruction begins at 8:30am. All academics take place between 8:30am-10:30am. From 10:30am one group goes to gym while the other group goes to technology. At 11:30am the groups switch and lunch is provided at 12:30 pm. Instruction includes two hours of NYSESLAT and NYS ELA preparation, one hour of physical education in a team setting environment, and one hour of technology, including cyber safety and SEL programs. The population is diverse, so our instruction is English, and includes Finish Line NYSESLAT workbooks, Heinle Picture Dictionaries,, MyOn Reader, Academic Vocabulary and CodeX. We provide our students with headphones, notebooks, IPads/Chromebooks and glossaries for each subject area. The content teachers are licensed as follows: · an ELA&nbsp;license. · knowledge of these students and their needs are vast.&nbsp;&nbsp; Every student is welcome to attend. All subgroups are represented, SIFE, Newcomers, ELLs with IEPs and long term ELLs. They are grouped either by grade or NYSESLAT level depending on the enrollment logistics. The ENL teacher provides the academic instruction alongside the ELA. We have found that the social skills in the physical education portion, (eg: teamwork, sportsmanship, and coordination and health awareness, are valuable for these students. We have had tremendous success with the Saturday Academy for over 10 years. The teachers will be using several online programs, such as, MyOn Reader, National Geographic Gateway (for Social Studies and Science content areas), NYSESLAT Prep: Continental New York ELLs, depending on the needs of the students. The classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards, iPads, Chromebooks and/or laptops. The ENL students are provided with explicit instruction that will enable them to achieve the skills and strategies necessary to navigate through a variety of text and be able to respond to questions regarding that text. All materials are aligned with the Common Core State Standards and supports language acquisition proficiency. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: We try to provide the ENL teachers a common planning period with the classes they push into once a week. At this meeting the teachers collaborate and discuss ideas and strategies that would work best for ELLs. The school uses LDC for creating modules (Literacy Design Collaborative)for planning lessons and meet during Monday Professional Learning to navigate through the UBD template and drill down the components of each unit. Monthly ENL meetings are conducted in the assistant principal's office where we discuss and share information on programs, students, trends, etc. Agendas and sign-in sheets are kept. The meeting consists of our 2 ENL teachers and the assistant principal, but will expand when we can schedule other content teachers to participate. The topics are not always pre-meditated, as this meeting is an opportunity for discussion, RLAT review, new admits, ELL assessment schedules and data, NYSESLAT analysis, etc. The ENL teachers receive professional development throughout the year along with the teachers who have ELLs in their classroom. This year the ENL teachers will open their classroom to all pedagogues and share strategies that promote Language Acquistion mastery and entry points for ELL students to be successful. These professional development sessions help us understand what is happening with specific students, if students are engaged and how we can continue to meet the needs of our Title III population. Some of the professional development that the ENL teachers and teachers of ELLs received was Google Drive and Google Docs to communicate with staff, Helping ELLs Become Independent Writers and Content and Language Institute: Displinary Literacy. In addition, PD for ENL teachers will continue throughout the SY with Professional Learning from the FSC, CITE, DELLS, LDC planning, and other relevant offerings. These sessions are turn keyed during professional development days and common planning periods. In addition, the ENL teacher will provide professional development opportunities throughout the year on educating the teachers on ENL strategies, compliance (LAP/TitleIII), ELL identification and the upcoming NYSESLAT . All professional development be supported throughout the school year either through outside learning (FSC, DELLS) or in house turn key. The professional development positively impacts the progress of ELLs because the teachers who attend these meeting utilize the strategies learned with the ELLs in the classroom. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 2018-19 CEP 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: During Open School Night in September parents of ELLs will be invited to come to the Parent Orientation Meeting. Refreshments will be served. A follow up meeting for Parent Orientation Meeting will be held and a breakfast will be provided. All the meetings are organized by the Parent Coordinator and the ENL teachers. Every ENL parent will be invited using the Entitlement letters that were translated into the child's home language and phone calls. The topics that we cover are parent program choice, the video (translated in their home language) on the DOE site was viewed, PTA meetings and student of the month were discussed and a meet and greet of the ENL providers took place. The Program Selection Form and the Survey were completed at the meeting. All forms that need to be completed by the parent are translated into their home language. A November PTA meeting is part of our monthly PTA, but we thought to invite ENL parents to an evening meeting as part of catering to the needs of those that might work during the day. The same topics will be discussed that were in the Breakfast meeting, but we are always open to questions and requests. Tuesday mornings are blocked for the Chancellors' request for parent outreach. All teachers servicing ENL students are given time to call or meet with or make appointments to meet with parents of these Title III students. This is also the time where the ENL teachers will have student led conferences with the parent and child. This is an initiative where students will share with their parents their progress and their goals for the year. Attendance sheets and agendas are always maintained for each event. Parents are notified of events and activities in a variety of ways, Skedula, back pack letters home in their home language, and phone calls. We are fortunate to have several pedagogues who can speak other languages and we make use of the Language Interpretation phone access. These outreaches occur throughout the school year on a regular basis- daily, weekly and/or monthly. There are many topics relevant to parents of ENL students. In addition, there will be coordinated workshops to demonstrate how to use the My Schools account and the NYC Schools account, specifically for our grade 8 students applying for HS. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to organize workshops such as nutrition, employment and housing. We also reach out to parents to teach them how to use the Datacation website and stay informed about their child's school progress. The DELLSS office also post videos and curriculum aligned with the Common Core standards, which have been turn-keyed to teachers servicing ENL students. Parents are invited to go on field trips. The field trips will enhance student learning through educational experiences. This past year we made several attempts to take take parents on trips or participate, but we had very little response. One trip planned for the Statue of Liberty, inviting every ENL parent, received only two replies. We did have a successful end of year celebration, where parent turn out was better and parents were able to celebrate the work and progress their child had experienced. 2018-19 CEP 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 27 School Name Robert H. Goddard Middle School School Number 202 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal William Fitzgerald Coach Vinna Deninno ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Dulberg Teacher/Subject Area Tina Monaco/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Mary Lewis/ELA Related-Service Provider James Stephen/ENL Superintendent Jennifer Ambert Assistant Principal Stacy Mizrahi Coach Maureen Viani School Counselor Brendan Lawler Parent Grace DiNicolantoni Parent Coordinator Judy Rea Field Support Center Staff Member Josh Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1107 2018-19 CEP 61 Total number of ELLs 95 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We will use the Great Leaps for Newcomers, as phonics assessments are embedded in the program. The DRP will used for more advanced student data. For the Newcomers, the NYSITELL helps determine their literacy skills across the four modalities. Newcomers will be evaluated on the Heinle unit tests. With the addition of Spectrum Phonics, these programs provide a lens into their phonemic awareness, decoding, fluency, and comprehension. This data helps inform our instructional plan by allowing the teacher to analyze and dig deeper into the students strengths and weaknesses, so an entry point can be determined and short term goals be set. NYSESLAT will help inform grouping, scheduling, and differentiation. TC writing has been incorporated into their writing process. We will use the ELL interim assessment as a baseline. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 62  We will schedule servicing our ENL students based on the assessments listed above. Utilizing specific programs, such as Great Leaps, Heinle, Gateway for content, Achieve 3000, etc. to meet the needs and address the levels of language acquisition skills our students need. This will be done with our ENL licensed teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use several tools for reviewing and analyzing assessment data: • MyOn Reader- baseline assessment • Achieve 3000- additional reading support in non-fiction • Close reads • Annotations and graphic organizers • Saturday ESL Academy • Great Leaps • NYSESLAT scores for each modality • UDL/UBD and collaboration during teacher team meetings and Inquiry • Norming pre-assessments • Student conferencing • Headphones • iPad/Chromebooks and appropriate apps- scribble press, starfall, ISL collective/BrainPop ESL • newcomer access program- read & write wrap-up and assess Glossaries/Dictionaries ELL Interim Assessment Heinle Picture Dictionaries with digital supports and workbooks for several levels: EN, EM, TR We monitor the usage of these programs and the growth from their baseline lexile levels, as well as the responses on the thought question from Achieve 3000. We monitor language acquisition progress through conversation, class work, writing tasks and assessments and align it with the five levels of language proficiency provided by the Queens ELL Instructional Leadership Institute. Teachers and staff include the ELLs in all programs and activities, for example, Spanish heritage, cultural diversity workshops, dances and we look at the number of participants, attendance, etc. We also have student of the month and honor the students at our monthly PTA meetings. We have been participating with the Literacy Design Collaborative for our ENL groups. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Throughout the year students will be assessed using the aforementioned programs and language proficiency rubric. This summative data will drive instruction, including flexible grouping, to address similar needs between students and individual needs of students. In addition, students will use Google Classroom to work on assignments in school and at home that will reinforce the areas that need intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a 6,7,8 grade school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns reveal that our students have achieved expanding levels on last years NYSESLAT and almost all of our ENL students made significant gains from the previous year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELLs are scheduled based on their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. The content area teachers receive a Data Profile throughout the year, which outlines their scores and levels of English Proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational models used is as follows; grade 6 is a free-standing ENL class, however, this year they are moving together to learn other subjects and not staying with the ELA teacher for each subject. When they are in their ELA class, an ENL teacher pushes into the class 8 periods each week. The grade 7 and grade 8 program have students mainstreamed into general education classes, grouped by NYSESLAT level, homogeneously. Beginners are grouped together in one general ed. class, intermediate students are grouped in another general ed. class and the same for the advanced and Expanding students. An ENL teacher services these students, either 2, 4 or 8 periods per week using the push in or pull out method. The students with disabilities, who are also considered ELL's are grouped for pull-out services with a licensed ENL teacher according to the level of their NYSESLAT score. This year we were able to provide minimal servicing in content area subjects to support the ELL students outside their ELA classroom. This is our only model. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each class program is structured to contain the mandated number of instructional minutes according to proficiency levels, as per CR Part 154. The EN and EM students receive 8 periods each week of ENL support from a licensed ENL teacher. The TR and EX students receive 4 periods each week for their ENL servicing, either push-in or pull-out, depending on the class and the number of students. The special education ENL students are also serviced, but they are pulled out, and grouped according to their NYSESLAT level and serviced either 4 periods each week or 8 periods each week. The Commanding and Proficient students, from the previous year, will receive at least 2 periods per week of ENL servicing. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction is delivered in a freestanding ENL program in grade 6 only. They travel together, but are grouped in flexible grouping. Newcomers will use the Great Leaps Program, starting with a pre-test and or Heinline Picture Dictionary program, along with digital resources that reinforce language acquisition. This allows instruction to focus on phonics, thematic development, vocabulary building, listening skills, grammar and development of fluency. Writing is also part of the program. The rest of the class will use the CCLS and the TCWP with the curriculum modified to meet their learning needs. The students will write in different genres while following the writing process. This curriculum does not provide much ELL support, so the ENL teacher collaborates with the ELA teacher to modify the instructional plans, using UDL guidelines and provides students with points of entry, graphic organizers, visuals, additional academic vocabulary, so they can get the “gist” of the theme and essential question. We are working with the Literacy Design Collaborative to have our ENL students produce three piece of writing utilizing UBD and getting supports from LDC. 2018-19 CEP 64  Grade 7 & 8 are using the push-in or pull out models based on NYSESLAT level. These students are mainstreamed into general education classes, grouped by NYSESLAT level homogeneously. Students are placed where they can received the appropriate amount of ENL servicing. An ENL teacher services these students either 2, 4 or 8 periods per week and in some cases additional support is provided in content classes. SWD, who are also considered ELLs, are grouped for pull-out services with a licensed ENL teacher based on their NYSESLAT levels. The CCLS are used within the TCWP in ELA, the Go Math curriculum contains a Spanish alongside the English, many math teachers have attended the DELLS math CCLS workshops. In other content areas we provide translation glossaries, textbook modification, and an ENL teacher provides support, whenever we can, in social studies and science. The gateway books have thematic units for social studies and science content. We are using the Passport SS curriculum, which has more visual entry points to learn content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Grade 7 & 8 are push-in models based on NYSESLAT level. These students are mainstreamed into general education classes, grouped by NYSESLAT level homogeneously. EN and EM are grouped in one class, TR, EX, CM in another class.. An ENL teacher services these students either 2,4, or 8 periods per week and in some cases additional support is provided in content classes. SWD, who are also considered ENLs, are grouped for pull-out services with a licensed ENL teacher based on their NYSESLAT levels. Guidance makes an effort to form groups of students who can communicate with each other in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is developed in several ways: Teachers push-in for a co-teaching model to differentiate instruction more cautiously and students are also pulled-out to enhance meaning, for those who need a more restrictive learning environment. Programs such as Achieve 3000, Discovery, MyOn Reader, Brainpop, Flocabulary, Boardworks, Starfall, ISL Collective and ESL Brain Pop, Learn Zillion, and Quill.org are available through technology, while Word Generation, Great Leaps, Go Math, are modified to meet the needs of the English Language Learner, using Universal Design for Learning. These programs naturally differentiate because text is based on their lexile scores, many visuals, chunking and using specific strategies, such as graphic organizers and close reads to help students understand how to navigate through text. The Depth of Knowledge Matrix provides multiple points of entry for teachers to use when planning instruction and for students to understand how they build on meaning and increase rigor. Our main goal is to provide students with Language Acquisition skills by referring to the five levels of proficiency. Transitional students are closely monitored and instruction is differentiated. Conferring with students is an important part of instruction as teachers get a sense of the speaking and listening abilities of their students while developing a relationship. SIFE students are integrated into the appropriate level class and special needs students are grouped for pull out instruction by an ENL teacher. All ENL students are provided with extended time and special location on all tests. Extended time to learn is also observed in the classroom instruction including "wait time." All students are invited to participate in the Saturday ENL Academy that usually runs for 9 sessions during the course of the year. This helps prepare them for the NYSESLAT, and ELA exam, teaching strategies for testing as well instilling language acquisition skills, reinforcing phonics, decoding, grammar and fluency. Breakfast and lunch are provided and a phys ed component, along with music creates a holistic program. The academy is by grade and taught by ENL teachers, when available or an ELA teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use the same approaches and technologies with the ENL-SWD’s as we do with all our students. The instruction may provide them with less text to negotiate at one time, graphic organizers to help ideas be sorted, etc. They are pulled-out rather 2018-19 CEP 65  than a pushed-in to accommodate the hours needed, as they are grouped according to NYSESLAT level. Materials are grade and age appropriate because they come from sources that data track their lexile levels; for example Achieve 3000, MyOn Reader, digital resources from TCWP, a common core curriculum, Go Math, also a common core curriculum. Language acquisition is accelerated and monitored through listening and speaking as well as the periodic assessing of their Great Leaps units, TCWP units, Picture Dictionary units, collaborations and presentations, the use of headphones and discussion in class. NYSESLAT test preparation is also utilized. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our self-contained classes are paralleled with the general education classes, providing the flexible scheduling needed to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are an MSQI school allowing strategic reading to take place one period each day. Interventions in each subject area are literacy based, allowing students to build their phonemic awareness, practice decoding and reading with fluency. Exposure to a variety of genres enables our students to understand specific features and allows our to build understanding of complex text. This supports our students through making sense of craft and structure, key ideas and details and the integration of knowledge and ideas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue our ENL Saturday Academy, but hope to increase the amount of instructional days. We also hope to have the students learning by grade and incorporate technology and phys. ed. This year we extended an invitation to parents of Ells for a Saturday program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS's are afforded equal access to every program that is offered to any other student. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs use TCWP, Go Math, Help Math, Gateway for science and social studies, National Geographic Magazines and/or Inside anthology. Teachers are provided with strategies, graphic organizers, scaffolding techniques, thematic and conceptual ideas and technology using iPads, Chromebooks and computers. Entering and emerging students have a picture dictionary with thematic units and digital support. Transitioning students are offered a more rigorous dictionary. All ENL students are provided with a glossary for each content area, that is in their native language. NYSESLAT workbooks are also utilized during the course of the school year and reinforced strategies and practice are taught during our Saturday ENL Academy. MSQI affords us an opportunity to address the needs of the ELLs through a strategic reading period. Hands on labs and materials enhance meaning for science, along with our interactive Promethean Boards and Smart Boards and a variety of Apps that support learning. We also use Achieve 3000 and MyOn Reader, in addition to Brain Pop, Discovery, Flocabulary, Scholastic Magazines, Learn Zillion, ESL Brainpop Quill, and ISL Collective. We are using TEAM (Teaching Ells For Academic Language Mastery). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language support is delivered through interpreters, other students, guidance, peer grouping in our ENL model. Technology also plays an important role with programs such as Google Translate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 66  We schedule our student services to meet the needs of the mandates as well as the needs of our students. They are placed in age appropriate classes that correspond with the services and resources that the student needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs use TCRWP, Go Math, Gateway for science and social studies, National Geographic Magazines and/or Inside anthology. Teachers are providing with strategies, graphic organizers, scaffolding techniques, thematic and conceptual ideas and technology using iPads and computers. Entering and emerging students have a picture dictionary with thematic units and digital support. Transitioning students are offered a more rigorous dictionary. All ENL students are provided with a glossary for each content area, that is in their native language. NYSESLAT workbooks are also utilized during the course of the school year and reinforced strategies and practice are taught during our Saturday ENL Academy. MSQI affords us an opportunity to address the needs of the ELLs through a strategic reading period. Hands on labs and materials enhance meaning for science, along with our interactive SmartBoards and a variety of Apps that support learning. We also use Achieve 3000 and MyOn Reader, in addition to Brain Pop, Discovery, Flocabulary, Scholastic Magazines, ESL Brain Pop, Learn Zillion and ISL Collective. We are looking at an SEL program for ENL students from Mawi Learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Many staff members are involved with activities for ELLs that are newly enrolled. They meet the guidance counselor of the grade they will be in, Ms. Lafroscia, grade 8, Mr. Lawler, grade 7 and Ms. Lopez, grade 6. Our deans also play a role, as they introduce the new students to their class and partner them with someone who speaks their language or can assist them in assimilating to a new environment. They are invited to join any and all clubs that may be happening, such as SAYA, which is an after-school program running Monday-Friday. All ELLs are also invited to our Saturday ENL academy, which offers academics as well as technology and physical education. Our students look forward to the Saturday Academy year after year. The academy offers breakfast and lunch and prepares students in the language acquisition strategies that are needed to succeed. The parent coordinator, Judy Rea, assists all families with whatever their needs may be, whether it is language translation, finding local resources, or understanding how to participate in school initiatives, such as Spanish Heritage celebration, art and music performances and drama. Ms. Rea provides parent workshops helping parents learn hygiene, English, testing, CCLS, etc. This year we invited parents to a parent group on Saturday mornings. Mr. Lawler, guidance counselor, arranged for Leadership, a CBO ,in concert with 21st Century schools, to lead this group. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 67  All teachers are teachers of literacy, therefore the professional development plan for all ELL personnel are learning opportunities on how to meet the literacy needs of the ENL students. This is achieved through a variety of instructional strategies, close reads, chunking, annotating, graphic organizers, discussion and Great Leaps, in order to build on language acquisition and academic vocabulary. The ENL teachers, Jennifer Dulberg and Jim Stephen, prepare professional learning sessions to help all staff understand the needs of our ENL population. This includes, thematic learning, academic vocabulary, and information about their students that support their learning needs. They inventory the languages needed for the word to word glossaries and collaborate with the teachers of the students they service. Language acquisition strategies include, focus words, repetition, meaningful examples, turn and talks, etymology, multi-sensory access, graphic organizers, etc. As a result of the needs of our students we have partnered with LDC, a Gates foundation project for SY 2017-2018. This LDC project meets regularly and prepares comprehensive lessons for an ENL group to encourage and improve their writing skills. The professional development offered comes from the FSC, DELLS, in-house collaboration, best practices and any offerings through PW or DOE affiliations. After our teachers attend a PD, we share best practices with all teachers. The office of DELLS and Ann Shannon, Miguel Cordero videoed our teacher for her checks for understanding using formative assessment strategies from Teacher Moves, during an ENL math lesson. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional Development on Monday afternoons and or Wednesday mornings provides professional learning regarding our ENL students. This includes best practices, strategies, rubrics, and reading intervention skills to assist teachers in understanding how their ELL students will learn best. Agendas and attendance are kept in the Professional Development binder. Our ENL teachers provide PL sessions throughout the school year regarding language acquisition strategies and content area turn-key, including academic language and thematic learning. This SY our teachers are participating in the Literacy Design Collaborative, a Gates Foundation grant that provides professional learning through a UBD lens, with coaching through monthly webinars and weekly meetings to improve and enhance writing skills using comprehensive instruction developed through specific modules that align with standards. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday is dedicated to parent outreach. Goals and language development are discussed with parents and teachers. In addition, parents are invited to Student Led Conferences where students show their class work to their parents. Often the teacher team is included when speaking with the parent. Translation services are used when needed. These services include our own staff for translation as well as the translation and interpretation phone line. SY 2017-2018, we will be part of MSQI's initiative to enhance our Parent Teacher partnerships through APTT. We invited our parents to attend a series of Saturday classes in concert with a CBO called Leadership. This is through a 21st century grant. We thought parents could drop their child at our Saturday Academy, and have their own informative session while their student is also learning. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have monthly PTA meetings that celebrate a student of the month encouraging parents to join us in celebrating their child's progress. We have been able to invite parents to dance competitions, art fairs, drama performances, band and chorus performances. We are hoping to provide parents with opportunities to learn English and/or participate in learning important curriculum during the course of the school year. Parents are invited to a variety of celebrations to observe their students' work, into the ENL classroom where students showcase their work. We have added a Talking Points APP . 2018-19 CEP 68  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Fitzgerald, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Robert H. Goddard MS 202 School DBN: 27Q202 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) William Fitzgerald Title Principal Stacy Mizrahi Assistant Principal Judy Rea Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Grace DiNicolantoni Parent Mary Lewis Teacher/Subject Area Thomas Taglienti/Science Teacher/Subject Area Vinna Deninno Maureen Viani Coach Coach Brendan Lawler School Counselor Mary Barton Josh Metz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jennifer Dulberg Other ENL Teacher Tina Monaco Other ELA Teacher James Stephen Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2/10/18 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27q202 School Name: Robert H. Goddard Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Judy Jennifer Rea Dulberg Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher Not Yet Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the interview process of the Ell identification parents are asked their preferred language. We survey the students and ask which language their parent/guardian prefers when communicating. When notices and/or written communications are distributed, we double side the communication with the preferred language and English.We use the interpretation unit, by telephone, when necessary. We reach out to any staff member who is proficient in any of the languages needed to be communicated. We also use Google translate as a resource. Parents are asked via letter what their written communication preferences are. 2018-19 CEP 72  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1152 322 190 31 English Spanish Bengali Arabic 65.72 18.37 10.84 1.77 1115 338 202 31 63.61 19.28 11.52 1.77 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none. just the excluded languages mentioned above Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Any and all documents are provided in languages preferred by the parent. We survey our students so that we can provide them with glossaries and dictionaries to support academics and academic language. Information regarding after school programs, principal policies, welcome letters, testing information, parent teacher conferences and outreach, Common Core curriculum information and any other relevant and pertinent communication such as grade 8 contracts, trip permission slips, orientation breakfast and school celebrations. Families September- October: Glossaries, Contact information, Blue Cards, Welcome letters, School information, Programs available, Video/photo release, student contracts November/March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use written translation on double-sided letters. We have access to Google translate. We have staff that speak many languages. We invite parents to visit workshops and arrange for them to understand through available resources including translation interpretation phone. May: Parent Teacher Conferences, Permission slips, We have dictionaries that have English/Chinese or whatever language is needed. Each year we get students from all over, most recently Italy. 2018-19 CEP 73  Spanish Bengali Chinese School information Graduation Requirements, Rules, Protocols any meeting any meeting any meeting written letters/oral communication written letters/oral communication written letters/oral communication 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Sept-November: Welcome breakfasts November, March, May: Parent teacher conferences Workshops on the new HS application process Events throughout the year such as Blooming Arts Festival. Concerts: chorus and band We use both written and oral translation. We use Google translator, all staff that can communicate in another language, language interpretation phone service, and relatives. Monthly PTA and Student of the Month November, March, May Staff, Google translate, Phone Translated versions, Glossaries, dictionaries Written translation letters Our first face-to-face meetings occur throughout the school year beginning with Back to School Night. This occurred on September 20 th . We are scheduling our Parent Teacher conferences for one day/evening session, for each of the dates, Nov. March and May. We have parent outreach on Tuesday mornings and invite parents to conference with teacher teams, SLC's and an APTT model. APTT Testing March-June School Documents and Information Sept-June 2018-19 CEP 74  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use Skedula, a variety of interpretation services including learning about the language line, staff members, surveys and continuous outreach. We also have a Facebook page and a school website where we post important and current information. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our LAC attends training. We have our ENL teachers turn key relevant Professional Learning sessions for all staff. Guidance assists in finding interpretation for those who need to communicate in a specific manner. The regulation is written and [placed in the Handbook that every staff member reads and receives. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will use any and all means of clear communication to ensure that all parents have necessary and relevant information translated for them. We utilize all of our resources to make sure parents/guardians have a clear understanding. Posted items are also translated and visible to all. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We have many invitations for parents to come and share celebrations, meetings, through out Skedula, Facebook, online, phone messenger, guidance outreach, dean outreach, parent outreach on Tuesday mornings with teachers. The PC organizes events, such as Dads coming to breakfast, monthly PTA meetings, parent surveys, performances through the arts, International brunch, monthly health workshops provided by a CBO in English and Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 75 
