2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q203 School Name: P.S. 203 OAKLAND GARDENS Principal: DEBORAH ANN FLORIO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Oakland Gardens 342600010203 Pre K – 5 School Number (DBN): 26Q203 53-11 Springfield Boulevard, Bayside, NY 11364 718 423-8652 Phone Number: 718 423-8713 Fax: Deborah Florio dflorio@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Deborah Florio John DelVecchio Julia Yan Deborah Florio N/A N/A NA District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: dGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 631-6943 Phone Number: 718 631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: Lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deborah Florio John DelVecchio Julia Yan Michelle Sufrin Maria Kromidas KellyApostolidis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stacey Silverman Janet Han Jane Connors JoohyunLee Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 203 ~ The Oakland Gardens School is to ensure that its students will achieve the highest academic standards as outlined in the Chancellor's Goals and the District Mission. As an elementary school comprised of grades Pre-K through 5, our school provides children with their first experiences and impressions of themselves as learners. Our core belief is that all children are entitled to an enriched education. We believe in building essential habits of mind, skills, knowledge and attitudes by creating a happy, structured, risk-free environment in which children are encouraged to inquire, apply and extend their understanding of the world. Parents and the community must be 2018-19 CEP 9  involved in the learning process which is foundational to the high expectations we have for our children and the mutual accountability we share for ensuring that all children meet high expectations. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The PS 203 school curriculum is aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards and establishes the foundation for the development of creativity, critical thinking skills, and the ability to problem solve as essential skills. PS 203 employs Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Go Math!, Exemplars, Amplify, and Passports to Social studies curricula. All staff members will continue to build upon their knowledge of the various implemented curriculum. Our kindergarten through fifth grade curricula ensures that students acquire key cognitive strategies in rich content. School-wide programs such as Book of the Month, Constitution Works, Junior Great Books, Strategic Games, the Independent Investigation Method (IIM), Learning Is Totally Enriched (LITE) Centers, Thinking Maps and Scamper are among the programs that enrich the curriculum to simultaneously support the NYS Common Core Learning Standards and the Instructional Shifts. These programs and accompanying teacher practices provide a staircase for developing higher order critical thinking skills and habits of mind such as creating, imagining and innovating and responding with wonderment and awe in students. In addition, PS 203Q will be implementing the RULER program, which will first train teachers and staff (through a assigned RULER implementation team) on social-emotional learning and development. These programs have been embedded and institutionalized into our school curricula in a manner that embeds family involvement, diversity, democracy, equity, and social justice. Courses offered from a full arts department (theater, visual arts, vocal and instrumental music, and dance) round out the core program for every child. Children and their work are celebrated throughout the building and it is evident that self-esteem, character, and pride are social-emotional competencies being built alongside the academic goals laid out for each student. Creativity, logic, and higher order thinking skills (Bloom’s Taxonomy) are developed in a variety of ways. Our students are honored as “Students of the Month” for qualities that extend beyond and compliment academics. For example, they may be “Perpetually Prepared” or an “Attentive Listener.” PS 203 continues to be a high achieving school in both academics and the arts. The school received National Blue Ribbon status in 2012 based on 2006-2010 data and currently maintains NYSED Reward status. We continue to meet or exceed goals in student progress, student achievement, school environment, and closing the achievement gap. The PS 203 student population has increased to 944 students currently, while maintaining student population characteristics: 72.88% Asian, 13.14% White, 9.64% Hispanic, 1.59% Black, .11% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and 2.65% Multi-Racial. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 203 is comprised of 13.45% English Language Learners (ELLs) and 9.22% Students with Disabilities (SWDs). PS 203 is not a Title I school as it has only 40% combined free and reduced lunch eligible children. Therefore, PS 203 is faced with the challenge of maintaining its quality of education for all learners (e.g.; ENLs, Gifted & Talented) with limited resources and space. PS 203 hosts District Gifted and Talented classes in grades K-5 (1 class per grade). As for our SWDs and ELLs, a focus will be around not only how they engage with the curriculum, but also how they gain access to it. In addition, both special populations have a need for individualized feedback with both their teachers and their peers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  PS 203 has shown strides this past year. Using various qualitative and quantitative data available (e.g., NYC School Survey, the School Quality Guide, NYS ELA and Math Item Skills Analysis Tool, i-Ready Reading and Math Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments, 20l4-2015 Quality Review, Inquiry Teams, etc.), we have decided, as a school community, to focus on rigorous classroom instruction (more specifically, small group instruction), student engagement, and assessment. According to our NYS Report Card (2016-2017) PS 203Q did not make AYP in Math because of the participation rate (95%). Rigorous classroom instruction, student engagement, and assessment align to the Framework for Great Schools under Rigorous Instruction. Through observations, collaborative planning, and the establishment of Professional Learning Communities, the focus target the following Danielson components: 1e - Designing Coherent Instruction (aligned to Collaborative Teachers -- Framework for Great Schools); 3b - Using questioning and discussion techniques (aligned to Framework of Great Schools -- Rigorous Instruction); 3c - Engaging students in learning (aligned to Great Schools -- Rigorous Instruction); and 3d - Using assessment in instruction (aligned to Framework for Great Schools -- Rigorous Instruction). By assessing students across a unit of study in each content area, teachers will adjust their pedagogy to best meet the needs of their learners. Teachers will also provide immediate and specific feedback to their students based on daily and formative assessment practices. In addition, there is focus on providing materials and resources that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and begin to unpack the Next Generation Learning Standards. To support CCLS, PS 203 will continue with Go Math!, Fundations, the Passports to Social Studies program, and Teachers College Reading and Writing Project during the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q203 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 938 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 35 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 51 43 8 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 45.0% % Attendance Rate 36.7% % Reduced Lunch 13.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 10.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 84.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 2 96.8% 8.1% 9.7% 1.6% 72.6% 2.6% 2 7% 5 91.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength According to observational data, teachers questioned the students using higher-order questions to probe for deeper understanding of material; however, student-to-student questioning is still an area of focus. Priority Needs for Domain 3 After careful analysis of our teachers' overall ratings, using the Danielson Framework, 66% teachers were rated "effective" in Domain 3 (Instruction) and 51% were rated "effective" in Domain 1 (Planning and Preparation). More specifically, 30% of teachers were rated highly effective and 68% of teachers were rated effective in component 3b; furthermore, 30% of teachers were rated highly effective and 69% of teachers were rated effective in component 3c. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of the teaching staff will receive an overall rating of "highly effective" on Danielson component 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques). 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development: UFT contract PD time will provide for implementation of a school plan for PD whereby all stakeholders may be a part of a learning community developing plans for rigorous inquiry work, rigorous instruction and building students’ capacity using the Next Generation Standards. School Personnel/All Pedagogues On-going development September 2018 -June 2019 Administration, Classroom teachers, out of classroom teachers, specialists, consultants from iReady, Inquiry team, Teachers College, Curriculum Committee, Teacher Teams Administration, classroom teachers, out of classroom teachers, specialists and curriculum committee Assessments are administered in October 2018, February 2019 and late May/early June 2019. Instructional technology in the TC in-house staff developers and Assistant Principal will be coming to model lessons, conferencing, student-feedback, and student-student questioning and discussion. In addition, TC developers will be meeting with grade teams on ways to plan for feedback opportunities between students, as well as helping teachers serve as facilitators - when students deepen their learning via peer questioning and discussion. PS 203 Professional Development Team will plan PDs to address how teachers plan and facilitate student-to-student discussion. In addition, professional development will investigate what engagement looks like in the classroom. Technology driven assessments in ELA & Math e.g. iReady and instructional technology lessons (i.e.Brain Pop and Raz-Kids). All Students K-5 Literacy based classroom assessments and strategies. All classrooms will use Teachers College unit of studies in Reading and writing. Begin planning through a UDL lens. 2018-19 CEP 14 classroom is ongoing from Sept 2018 through June 2019 All classrooms have leveled libraries in fiction and non fiction. Guided Reading and independent reading daily in all classrooms K-5. For our SWDs, staff will be attending SDI training, TCIS, as well as professional development on the SPIRE program (Tier II interventions). For our ELLs, our ENL providers will be focusing on our Newcomer group. The students will attend a Title III After-School program to focus on vocabulary skills (a priority area for our ELLs). Thinking maps can be utilized as a tool to foster student discussion and reference to an idea. Socratic Method, supported by Junior Great Books, supports students engagement and interpretive discussion and higher level thinking . Passport to Social Studies. RTI and AIS; Orten-Gillingham; GoMath Inquiry Core Team meetings to discuss how feedback given (i.e. student to student and teacher to student). Also to investigate the platform in which students receive feedback (i.e. POST IT notes). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Engagement   communication notebooks; includes homework sign off, parent comment/question section (teacher and parents) September back to school night conferences; classroom orientation including classroom and school wide goals; curriculum overview (administration, teachers, and parents) iReady user names and passwords for at home on-line learning (Technology Teacher: Lisa Gagliano) iReady Parent Reports sent home after November 2018 and February 2019 assessments (Lisa Gagliano)   Raz Kids user names and passwords for at home on-line learning (Teachers)   Tuesday parent engagement time (Teachers and parents)  Workshops during PTA meetings (various point people)  School messenger service to inform parents with upcoming school and DOE events (Parent Coordinator: Debra Halpern) School newsletter (teachers) School website (Jordan Simons and PTA)    November & March Parent Teacher conference dates (all staff members)  May, Final UFT Conference night (all staff members)  Pop-up workshops and conferences revolving around curriculum and quality discussion in classrooms (Jane Connors, Ai-Huei Chang-Lau (AP), Jordan Simons, Debra Halpern) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Participation in Teachers College Reading and Writing Project includes PD. Common prep periods for teacher planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark- MOTP Report and Advance Dashboard. By February 2019, 35% of teachers will be rated highly effective in components 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers reported that students are safe in their class. Priority Needs After careful analysis of the 2017-2018 Occurrence Summary (from OORS), there were 19 Level 3 and 4 Occurrences at PS 203. Thus, there is a need for training and professional development pertaining to social-emotional learning. Using DASA, Respect for All, Sanford Harmony, and RULER as platforms, we will begin to cultivate positive behaviors and conflict resolution skills within our staff and our students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% (15 occurrences) decrease in Level 3 and 4 occurrences as shown by the Occurrence Summary provided by OORS. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development for teachers and paraprofessionals revolving around the RULER approach, an evidence-based approach to develop social-emotional awareness within staff and students. All staff members 1:1 conferences, RTI, Small Group Instruction, ELL Push-in/Pull-out, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Speech, and Academic Intervention Services. Level 1 and 2 students, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Bottom Third Students Ongoing from August 2018 - June 2019 September 2018-2019 Administration and point people Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ENL, AIS), School Based Support Team School Counselor and Social Worker support students in classrooms by providing mini-lessons on character education, conflict resolution, tolerance, acceptance and respect for all. In addition, The School Counselor and Social Worker teach Whole School September 2018-2019 Administration, School Counselor, Social worker, and all staff members and anti-bullying curriculum in alignment to the DOE's Respect for All Initiative. We support equity and access for all students by providing them with opportunities to learn how to work together with one another, engage in opportunities of peer collaboration in a supportive, nurturing environment and develop skills to be effective citizens. The Sanford Harmony Program will support the above work and focuses on Diversity and inclusion, empathy and critical thinking, communication, problem solving and peer relationship. Our School Counselor and Social Worker provides our young girls with the opportunity to improve their self esteem and self confidence by meeting during lunch to discuss, set goals and 2018-19 CEP 18 All students September 2018-2019 Administration support their emotional well-being. They will use the "Beautiful Me" program to support and guide this work. In house community service (Grades 1-5): as a restorative practice the administration will implement "community service" requirements for students who act disruptively during the school day. On a periodic basis we will analyze the Occurrence Report to see if we are progressing towards the goal. Through observations and walk-throughs, administration will take notice of social-emotional artifacts and practice within the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication with families - representation on the School Leadership Team (Monthly) Parents provided with Discipline Code and Students Behavior Contract (September 2018) Monthly school and class newsletters (First Monday of every month) Monthly Parent Engagement meetings (Every Tuesday) Parent Workshops (i.e. Raising a Well-Rounded Child) (throughout the school year) Parent Orientation with teachers and administrators, social media, and PTA websites. (September 2018) Parent Workshops on curriculum, expectations and ways to help, School Messenger reminders, etc. (Every other month) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, All teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ESL, AIS, SETSS), Parent Coordinator, School Based Support Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  By February 2019, PS 203Q will display half the amount (around 8) of Level 3 and 4 Occurrences prescribed by OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Occurrence Summary Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers reported they use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life. PS 203Q's Professional Development Team meets on an ongoing basis to assign, develop and turn-key targeted professional learning opportunities for all staff members. Based upon teacher observations, 31% (on average) scored at least an 'Highly Effective' on Domain 3C (Engaging Students in Learning) in targeted small group instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of teachers will rated 'Highly Effective' on Domain 3C of the Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - Continued implementation of curriculum/professional development team: a team of teachers from all grades/content specialists (vertical structure) who collaborate with their grade mates/content specialists (horizontally) to ensure instructional coherence and inquiry work with Inquiry Lead. All faculty members Administrators and all staff members Ongoing: September, 2018-June, 2019 Tuesday during UFT PD time - Continued Implementation of leadership cabinet: key school personnel responsible for collaboration with administration on relevant and timely matters that impact student achievement at all levels for all students. - SLT meetings - Professional Development: Teachers College and Queens Borough Office - For our SWDs and ELLs, administration will evaluate to see how well they are planning their lessons to address the needs of the high-needs subgroups. Implementation of work that comes out of inquiry team, curriculum team, leadership cabinet, grade level teams and SLT will support classroom and out of classroom teaching and learning. Teacher Teams and Inquiry Teams will focus on a problem of practice related to the Danielson Framework. Administration will train a small PLC on reading and writing strategies for small group instruction. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators and all staff members All students Ongoing: September, 2018-June, 2019 Tuesday during UFT PD time n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication with parents incorporating the work that comes out of the teacher teams will be provided: at PTA meetings (PTA, Principal, Parent Coordinator) at SLT meetings (Principal, UFT Representative, PTA Executive Board, elected teachers)    During Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time (Teachers and Parents)  Through each child's communication notebook/Remind App. (Teachers and Parents)  Workshops for parents (Parent Engagement Committee) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, All teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ENL, AIS, SETSS), Parent Coordinator, School Based Support Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 35% of observed teachers will already be receiving a 'Highly Effective' mid-year rating (of Domain 3C) using the Danielson Framework on Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Mid-Year MOTP Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths This past year, as a supplement to the Go Math! curriculum, teachers incorporated (and planned) the Exemplars materials into each Math unit. In addition, as an inquiry, teachers also studied the ways they gave feedback to students in mathematics. Priority Needs According to end of year data from our Advance observation system, 67% of teachers were rated "effective" in component 1e and 37% were rated "highly effective." Although this is satisfactory, there is still room for improvement in appropriate planning (i.e. small group instruction, guided reading, strategy grouping, etc.). Furthermore, there is still room for growth when planning for not only our struggling learners, but also our learners who excel. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 45% of teachers will rate as "Highly Effective" on component 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) as prescribed by the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - Targeted and aligned professional development opportunities form Teachers College and Queens Borough North Field Support Center. All teachers & Staff Administrators and all staff members Ongoing: September 2018-June 2019. All students Ongoing: September 2018-June 2019. Vertical Team of one teacher per grade Ongoing: September 2018-June 2019. Administrators and all staff members Administrators and all staff members n/a n/a n/a - Inter-visitations with other schools. - Professional Development for teachers in planning for small group instruction and UDL. Support to SWDs, ELLs and high risk students will be provided through open and ongoing RTI meetings among key administrators, school personnel, outside providers, and parents. The Professional Development Team created the professional learning calendar. Through this process, in collaboration with administration, the PDT sifted through professional learning opportunities (provided by Teachers College and the QBNFSC) to turnkey, based upon teacher and school need. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication with parents that supports school leadership initiatives through: at PTA meetings at SLT meetings    During Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time  Monthly newsletter 2018-19 CEP 25  School Website Social Media School Messenger communication     Workshops for parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Strong Schools Strong Communities - Administration (Principal and AP) and Grade Leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of teachers will be rated as "Highly Effective" on component 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) as prescribed by the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As conveyed by the School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers agreed (or strongly agreed) that teachers work closely with families to meet students' needs. Furthermore, 100% of teachers also agreed that teachers understand families' problems and concerns. Conversely, only 83% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of parents/guardians will report on the NYC School Quality Guide that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and families Ongoing: September 2018-June, 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Faculty Staff, PTA Executive Board, SLT Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Social Media (Twitter) School website School Messenger relay     Orientation between staff and parents at the beginning of each year giving parent’s incisive insight into what the expectations are for their children by giving out in-depth information in both folders and handouts.  Newsletter will be sent home to parents informing them of school activities/curriculum School Leadership Team  Monthly Parent Coordinator notifications   Providing Translated Materials  Communicate with parents enabling them to give  important feedback on their children’s learning through communication notebooks. Support for parents in areas such as: Internet safety, school procedures, District 26 & DOE Initiatives, Quality Review, Bloom's Taxonomy, ENL and ICT  Maintain regular contact with families about student  progress during parent/teacher conferences and at Tuesday afternoon UFT parent engagement time Involve families as partners in the assessment process and communicate assessment results at PTA and Leadership meetings.  Promote positive dialogue and interactions will all families and respond to their concerns  Dissemination and expansion of specifically designed Parent Orientation packets  GO Math! Academy, Writing Celebrations Orientation for ENL students' parents with translators on site Orientation for SWD families ENL and SWD families Ongoing: September 2018-June, 2019 ENL teachers, SAT Team, classroom teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, school based translators 2018-19 CEP 28 The Raising Beautiful Child Project has a home-school connection Pre K-grade 5 students Pre K- grade 5 families Our School's Social Worker, began a parent group to support Spanish Speaking Parents. This Parent group meets the last Friday of the month. The parents discuss their needs and how the school can best meet the needs and their child. The parent group of PS 203, known as "Madres Latinas Unidas", will take on and host a fall school event to support mufti-cultural traditions. School Counselor and Social Worker School Social Worker Ongoing September 2018-June 2019 Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. American Ballet Theater, BikeNYC, Bayside Hills Civic Association Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday UFT parent meeting time, pre-PTA meeting workshops, GOOGLE forms surveys, website, Twitter Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019 we will review progress towards meeting the annual goal by using attendance records and reflection/evaluation surveys. We will make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. The administration will also be meeting with SLT and the PTA Executive Board to discuss progress and next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records of all PT conferences, workshops and survey responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS services are provided during the school day. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tier 1 instruction will be employed by the classroom teacher based upon formative and summativeassessments via the TCRWworkshop. If necessary, small group instruction ( 1 -2x per week) will ensue (both push-in and pull-out). Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interventions (i.e. graphic organizers, auditory chanting, etc.) and other strategies (according to the RTI protocol) are employed to bridge the proverbial gap between the deficits and where the student needs to be academically. Students are also seen in small groups to further individualize the instruction (1 -2x per week) by an “interventionist” (i.e. SETSS provider, Reading Teacher, etc.). Wilson Fundations(Tier II and III) interventions are employed for struggling learners. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) AIS services enable students in grades K-5 to receive remediation in ELA (aligned with the CCLS). Using the i-Ready diagnostic and Fountasand PinnellBenchmark System, students are universally screened to gauge their academic standing in the following areas: Phonemic awareness; Phonics; Vocabulary; and Comprehension (Informational and Literature). Students in grades 4 and 5, who scored level 1 or 2 on the State ELA Assessment also qualify. Classroom performance (via formative and summative assessments) and 2018-19 CEP 30  Mathematics teacher reports are also referenced to evaluate if AIS services are warranted. Fountasand Pinnelland Teachers College Reading and Writing assessments (benchmark assessments) are also used to evaluate struggling students. Students in kindergarten will also be using the WIlsonReading Program (Fundations) to aid their students in learning basic phonics and writing. Students may qualify for AIS based upon their report card grade analysis (and, subsequently, Pupil Personnel Team meetings), and observations/anecdotal records. AIS services enable students in grades K-5 to receive remediation in Math (aligned with the CCLS). Using the i-Ready diagnostic, students are universally screened to gauge their academic standing in the following areas: Cardinality; Number and Operations in Base 10; Operations and Algebraic Thinking; Number and Operations in Base Ten (Fractions); Small group instruction ( 1 -2x per week) AIS services are provided during the school day. Interventions (i.e. graphic organizers, visual modeling, etc.) and other strategies (according to the RTI protocol) are employed to bridge the proverbial gap between the deficits and where the student needs to be academically. Students are also seen in small groups to further individualize the instruction (1 -2x per 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Social Studies Measurement and Data; and Geometry. In Grades 4 and 5, students also qualify based upon their standardized test scores. Classroom performance (via curriculum assessments through Go Math!) and teacher reports are also referenced to evaluate if AIS services are warranted. Students may qualify for AIS based upon their report card grade analysis (and, subsequently, Pupil Personnel Team meetings), and observations/anecdotal records. For Grade 5, the fourth-grade state exam is used to assess the need for an AIS service. In addition, since Science employs the aforementioned skills in Mathematics and ELA, many of the students who need extra support qualify for Math and ELA AIS. AIS services may be employed based upon classroom performance, report card grades, and observations for all grades. We integrate our socials studies content and skills with our ELA AIS component The Passport to Social Studies (a DOE-made week) by an “interventionist.” AIS students meet 1 – 2x a week in a small group setting. Small group instruction (1-2x per week). AIS services are provided during the school day. AIS students meet 1 to 2 times a week in a small group setting Small group instruction (1 -2x per week) AIS services are provided during the school day 2018-19 CEP 32  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) curriculum) will be implemented. At-Risk services provided by the Guidance Counselor are determined by teacher reports, anecdotal notes, observations, and report card grades. At-Risk Services provided by the Social Worker are determined by teacher reports, anecdotal notes, observations, and report card grades. At-Risk Services by the Speech and Language Pathologist are based upon teacher reports, Pupil Personnel Team meetings, observations, and classroom performance. At-Risk Services, provided by the Occupational Therapist, are determined based upon teacher recommendation or referral. The Occupational Therapist offers interventions within the classroom; if the child does not progress, the OT may seek to evaluate the student. Students meet 1 time a week in a small group setting. AIS services are provided during the school day Students meet 1 time a week in a small group setting. Students meet 1 time a week in a small group setting. 2018-19 CEP 33  AISfor Occupational Therapy occurs within the classroom environment as a Tier I strategy (according to RTI protocol). If a child does not progress, an evaluation may be necessary. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Oakland Gardens School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Oakland Gardens School will support parents and families by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; Continue to provide parents with opportunities to attend "Pop-Up" workshops. ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s social/emotional and academic progress; e.g. IReady, GoMath Academy, Sanford Harmony (social emotional learning program). ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s programs. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system; ● schedule parent meetings during parent-engagement time to share information about the school's educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor; parent "pop-up" workshops. ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 41  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association); ● supporting or hosting family events; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 42  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 21 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Presently, P.S. 203 has an ENL program that utilizes both stand-alone and integrated models . Students are grouped by grade level and language proficiency, based upon the NYSITELL and the 2018 NYSESLAT scores. With the supplemental money provided by Title III funding, it is our intention to focus on newcomer ELL students (subgroup) in grade two who scored Entering or Emerging on the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT. These students did not attend kindergarten and/or first grade in an English language school system; therefore, they are lacking the fundamental literacy skills appropriate for their age and grade level. We will also focus on those students who did not make adequate gains on the NYSESLAT (as reflected in the EDAT) taken in grade one (for example, students who did not progress to the next level in English proficiency on the NYSESLAT). To support these targeted populations, and to also support District 26's initiative in STEAM education, the monies from Title III will be used to purchase "Picture Perfect Science" and "Classpacks" which "integrates science and reading in an engaging, kid-friendly way." The program employs an inquiry-based model where students work collaboratively to problem solve and and ask thoughtful questions. The program encourages academic language that will support the students in their respective classrooms as well. "Picture Perfect Science" (Published by National Science Teachers Association Press) and "Classpacks" also emphasizes BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) via student-led discussions in a real-world context. The "Picture Perfect Science" program supplies for on-grade, below grade, and above grade level materials, which can best meet the needs of our Grade 2 students participating in the Title III After-School program. In addition, the monies from Title III will purchase licenses from Imagine Learning for English Language Learners, which combines an engaging program with individualized learning to aid those students who need support in all four modalities (reading, writing, speaking, and listening). The Imagine Learning program gives native language support and transitions towards full English language proficiency. The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays. On Wednesdays, from 2:40-3:40, students will engage in Imagine Learning Lessons. For the rest of the time, 3:40 - 5:00, students will focus on reading comprehension strategies (via a picture book aligned to the science lesson). This will help reading comprehension strategies "while teaching science in a meaningful context." One teacher will facilitate this component. On Thursdays, the students will again engage in Imagine Learning Lessons from 2:40 - 3:40. For the rest of the time, 3:40 - 5:00, students will participate in an engaging science lesson (aligned to the previously read book on Wednesday). Two teachers will facilitate this component, since experimentation involves more hands-on work involving small-group instruction. To aid in the seamless integration for Imagine Learning and "Picture Perfect Science" Title III monies will also be used to buy 5 iPad Pros. The iPads will be labeled "Title III LEP" and will be used exclusively for the Title III supplemental program. Consequently, this will allow students to flawlessly integrate in all facets of technology, thus further engrossing the students into 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information STEAM endeavors. Parents will be notified of the program through letters (translated in their home language). In addition, attendance will be taken at each session. All records will be kept and maintained in an ENL Binder located in the ENL teacher's classroom. Subgroups and Grade Levels: Based upon respective EDAT, NYSITELL, and NYSESLAT scores, we will be focusing on newcomer ELLS (grade two) and those students who did not make adequate gains on the NYSESLAT (in Grade 1).Schedule and Duration: The Title III program will begin on November 2018 (4 sessions in November) and end in April 2019. Language of Instruction: English with native language support. The Imagine Learning software/program allows for native language support (in multiple languages - i.e. Chinese and Korean), while also fostering English language proficiency. Number and Types of Certified Teachers: Three certified ENL teachersType of Materials: Imagine Learning for ELLs; NSTA's "Picture Perfect Science", assembled book collection, and "Classpacks"; Apple's iMac 21.5 inch desktop. All materials will be used exclusively by Title III students. These materials are supplemental and distinct from the curriculum and materials employed in daily instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Imagine Learning will provide additional professional development to the two teachers conducting the after-school Title III Program. This ongoing professional development will focus on the analysis and interpretation of data expressed by the Imagine Learning data analysis tool. This will allow all teachers to meet each child where he or she is at in regards to English proficiency, and offer next steps to move the students academically. PD is provided at no cost with the purchase of the licenses. Mondays Professional Development time (2:40 - 4:00pm) will allow teachers to attend and turnkey their learning (from various PDs) to staff members. PS 203's instructional focus revolves around feedback and how to effectively form small groups (including ELLs).These professional development sessions will provide high quality, on-going training that will impact teacher performance throughout the school year. Teachers will be able to obtain and turnkey skills and strategies for implementation within all classrooms, thus allowing for ELL students to progress across all content areas and modalities and strive for proficiency status. All attendance from professional development will be kept on file in the ENL room. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The Imagine Learning program can provide parent progress reports to the parents. These reports will be in the native language of the parents, as surveyed by our parent coordinator for their preferred language of communication. These are progress reports that show student progress, but also give parents suggestions on activities that they can work on together at home (vocabulary, reading strategies, etc.). All programs will come at no cost to Title III.(TBD) PS 203 will be having a Multicultural Night, which gives parents and students the opportunity to represent the foods, fashions, artifacts, and stories from their respective native countries. There are many opportunities for parents of ELLs to engage with the PS 203 school community. Throughout the year, "Pop Up Workshops" are given around curriculum, assessment, social-emotional learning, etc. These workshops are based upon the parents expressing what kind of workshops they want (needs analysis). The following workshops will be presented throughout the year. - How to Prepare Your Child for Middle School, Presented by Debra Halpern, Parent Coordinator-New York State Assessments - How to Prepare Your Child, Presented by school administration, the Testing Coordinator, Voula Angelidakis, and Stacey Silverman, ENL teacher-How to Communicate with Your Child, Presented by Cassandra Pitkin, Guidance Counselor-School Safety - Our Plan: Issues and Concerns, Presented by Debra Halpern In addition, PS 203 celebrates the Lunar New Year in February. Parents are invited to monthly meetings, and assist in planning for this event. They are invited to share their own cultural experiences and talents for this day. Parents also decorate and share homemade cultural dishes for the celebration.The parent coordinator and school administration ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet our school's needs, including translation for Parent-Teacher Conferences and all workshops. In addition, parents will have the opportunity to view all aforementioned events on the school website. All website resources are translatable. Parents will also be notified by paper, School Messenger (which allows for email/texts blasts), and email regarding school-wide events and endeavors. Social Media (i.e. Twitter) is readily used to inform the community of upcoming events. All agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations to events will be kept on file in the parent coordinator's office. In addition, all materials sent home in the parent's preferred language(s) Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,485.66  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 24 sessions x 2 teachers x 2.3 hours x $60.65 20 sessions x 1 teacher x 2.3 hours x $60.65 $6,695.76 + $2,789.90 = $9,485.66 2018-19 CEP 49  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL iPad pros to use Imagine Learning and for STEM research Licenses for Imagine Learning Cases for iPad protection 10.5 inch iPad Pro (x5) = $2905 Picture Perfect Science by NSTA supplemental materials $434 Science/ClassPacks and non-fiction class sets (previously purchased) $3000= 20 Imagine Learning licenses UAG cases for IPad $25.25 x 5 = 126.25 $15,950.91 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Oakland Gardens Borough Queens School Number 203 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deborah A. Florio Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Stacey Silverman Teacher/Subject Area Jordan Simons/SETSS-ENL/IEP Teacher/Subject Area Voula Angelidakis - Reading Te Related-Service Provider Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Ai-Huei Chang-Lau Coach type here School Counselor Parent Donna Korniewicz Parent Coordinator Debra Halpern Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 879 Total number of ELLs 126 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) n/a 1 n/a 4 n/a 3 n/a 2 n/a K n/a Lang. n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 n/a 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The early literacy skills of our ELLs are assessed using the iReady Diagnostic Tool. This assessment is aligned to the New York State Learning Standards and combines a valid and reliable growth measure, while also providing "next steps" for individualized/group instruction. The next steps for instruction may include a focus on specific strategies, such as phonemic awareness, intensive vocabulary instruction, and reading comprehension (informational and literature). Each student’s specific language arts or mathematical weakness is measured and targeted for growth. The tasks involved specifically integrates reading, writing, and listening. It allows for evaluation, teaching and intervention, monitoring and supporting ELL students. This assessment takes place three times per year: September/October, January/February, and May/June. Teachers also use authentic assessments to evaluate the early literacy skills within the classroom. In addition, the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System is also used in all grades. This assessment provides valuable insight into our students' needs 2018-19 CEP 52  and renders a leveled/grade reading score to each student. As a result, teachers can inform their instruction based upon the levels of their students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? PS 203Q now functions on an eight-period day. Teachers have an administrative period that allows them to discuss all respective assessments and next steps. In addition, teachers participate in weekly RTI and monthly PPT meetings that use the aforementioned assessments to inform instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of our ELL program is seen through advancement in the five proficiency levels of the NYSESLAT (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding). Most students move to the next level of proficiency (i.e. entering to emerging; expanding to commanding) on this assessment). For students in testing grades, the NYS ELA and Math Item Analysis Tool is used to pinpoint where a student struggled as well. To identify specific areas of need, PS 203 uses Fountas and Pinnell Running Records as well as the iReady Diagnostic to pinpoint specific areas which need to be addressed. Consequently, Fountas and Pinnelle, iReady Diagnostic, and the previous year's NYSESLAT, are used as benchmarks to measure progress and identify need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The RTI team meets weekly and monthly (with administration as PPT team) to discuss summative data. In addition, teachers participate in an administrative period that allows them to review all summative information. Personnel wise, PS 203 has a Reading Club (taught by a reading teacher) and a math club (taught by an AIS provider) to help students who are struggling with ELA and math respectively The Reading Club targets students who are below grade level in total reading; the Math Club targets students who need guidance in basic math remediation. In addition, both SETSS providers offer Tier III interventions for students struggling in specific areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Roles and Responsibilities Tier I Interventions (Whole Class) All students receive Tier I instruction. Using the various assessments (universal screener, formative/summative assessments, report card analysis, etc.) and curriculum, the classroom teacher will evaluate each student to gauge skills in ELA and Mathematics and provide interventions based upon the Universal Design of Learning (i.e. an intervention may benefit all students). Using research-based curriculum and evaluative tools, the classroom teachers will constantly assess each student’s progress to see if intervention services are warranted (for Tier II). If the classroom teacher seeks advice, he or she will consult with any RTI personnel and/or administrator (who will, then, also consult with the rest of the RTI team at the weekly/monthly meetings). All classroom teachers will provide the highest quality of instruction by: Tier 1 Interventions may also include: Tier II: At-Risk Intervention (Small Group Instruction 5-8 students) 2018-19 CEP 53  All children receive Tier I instruction, but those children in need of supplemental intervention receive additional instruction at Tier II. These students must be seen in a small group: the duration of Tier II is around eight-to-twelve weeks with a maximum of five-to eight students in a small group. The classroom teacher should meet with the student(s) at least three times-per week for twenty-to-thirty minutes. The classroom teacher must frequently track how the student is doing. This is used as evidence, in case of a referral for Tier III or special-education placement. Again, the classroom teacher must progress monitor to keep track on how the student is doing within the area in need (he or she can use the Tracking/Referral Form for Teacher/Interventionist (Form B) during the duration of time at which he/she sees the student. The classroom teacher can use his or her own method of progress monitoring as well. He or she can use the PRIM for reference as well. Once the six-to-twelve weeks are complete, the classroom teacher will assess the student to see what the next steps will be. If the student is showing progress, he or she may decide to keep the student in the present Tier or give her Tier I strategies. The teacher may also refer for Tier III strategies. Teachers who employ Tier 2 strategies must: -Data to inform the type of intervention needed; -Meet to develop an intervention plan for each student; -Frequently evaluate students to determine the need for additional interventions (Tier III) or a change of intervention. -Use the Tracking/Referral Form for Teacher/Interventionist (Form A) (or any method or progress monitoring) to monitor the progress of each student. Tier II Interventions include: TIER III: At-Risk with Interventionist Once the eight-to-twelve weeks are completed, and if a student has not shown progress in either Tiers I or II, the teacher may refer the student for Tier III services (with permission by the parent). With parental permission (Form A), an interventionist (special-education teacher and/or related service provider may see the student. For 6-8 weeks, this intervention can occur at least five times a week for at least 45 minutes, and is in addition to Tier I and Tier II interventions: the student will still receive small group instruction three days per week in the classroom (as mentioned in section entitled Tier II). The classroom teacher must keep progress monitoring for the student; the interventionist must progress monitor at this point as well. Tier 1 Interventions: Using the various assessments (ECLAS, formative/summative assessments, iReady Diagnostic (universal screener), the classroom teacher assesses every student (including ELLs) to gauge their skills in phonological awareness, phonics, high-frequency words, vocabulary, and comprehension (literature and informational text). Using the aforementioned programs and evaluative tools, the classroom teachers constantly evaluate each student’s progress to see if intervention services are warranted. If an ELL student needs intervention, the teacher will monitor any (and all) progress using the TIER 1 Tracking Form. Using the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM) or any other authentic interventions, the teacher can select an appropriate remediation based upon the need(s) of each student. This renders Tier 1 as a differentiated strategy, as a classroom teacher can choose a strategy that fits the needs of an English Language Learner. If the classroom teacher seeks advice, he or she will consult with any special-education personnel, ESL teacher, and/or administrator (who will, then, also consult with the rest of the RTI team at the weekly/monthly meetings). Continuous assessment and evaluation of each student will occur to see how the student is progressing. All classroom teachers will provide the highest quality of instruction by: differentiating the instruction; having clear goals for each student; using research-based instruction strategies and interventions; sharing assessment data with colleagues, students, and parents; participating in ongoing professional 2018-19 CEP 54  development opportunities to ensure strong instructional and classroom management skills; collaborating with colleagues to review student work and common assessments. ELL students receive glossaries and content area translated dictionaries to aid them in translating any unknown words or phrases. Tier 2 For any ELL students not responding to Tier 1 strategies, Tier 2 interventions render the student the opportunity to work in a small group. Tier 2 builds upon Tier 1: students who receive Tier 1 interventions will continue to receive that instruction. In order for a student to receive Tier 2 interventions, teachers must hand in a completed copy of the Referral for Intervention Services as well as the completed copy of the Tier 1 Tracking Form. ANY ASSESSMENTS/DATA supporting a teacher’s concerns is NECESSARY. A designated team member/interventionist (Speech, SETSS, etc.) will be assigned and conduct the intervention service for eight-to-twelve weeks, with parental permission. The interventionist (and general education teacher) must create and open an RTI folder in order to track how the student is progressing. This is used as evidence, in case of a referral for SETSS or any other special-education placement. The duration of Tier 2, as said previously, is around eight-to-twelve weeks. The interventionist will meet with the student(s) once or twice per week for thirty-to-forty-five minutes. Tier 2 services are provided using a pull-out or push-in method (depending on the need of the student). The Tier 2 interventionist must complete the Intervention Tracking Form during the duration of time at which he/she sees the student. He or she can use the PRIM for reference as well. Once the eight-to-twelve weeks are complete, the RTI team will reconvene on the student’s case and decide whether the student’s needs warrant strictly Tier 1 or 3 interventions. (The RTI team might also decide to keep the student in Tier 2, if the student is showing progress.). Teachers who employ Tier 2 strategies must: Meet to develop an intervention plan for each student via authentic assessments aligning to the curriculum; frequently evaluate students to determine the need for additional interventions (Tier 3) or a change of intervention; and, use the Intervention Tracking Form to monitor the progress of each student. Tier 3 Once the eight-to-twelve weeks are completed, the RTI team will meet to discuss those students who might need further intervention. Students who previously received Tier 2 interventions might warrant an evaluation to receive SETSS, Speech and/or Language, etc.; students who showed progress will be able to stay in Tier 2 or will be able to receive Tier 1 strategies. Tier 3 interventions require a comprehensive special-education evaluation by the school psychologist (with parental permission). The interventionist and general education teacher must together complete the Referral for TIER 3 Intervention Services and submit it (with all other documentation) to the School Based Support Team. If a student qualifies for SETSS (or any other related service), the student will then be entitled to a Tier 3 intervention service. Students’ progress will be closely monitored and evaluated using assessments (both formal and informal) prescribed by the classroom and special-education teachers/related service personnel. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After careful analysis of the RLAT and EDAT (ELL Analysis Tool) many patterns are revealed. According to the EDAT, our of 121 ENL test takers, 37 advanced one proficiency level and 7 advanced two proficiency levels; however, 27 remained at the same profiency level while 7 students regressed one level. As a whole, those students who did not advance, scored lower on the writing and the reading modalities. Forty-six students scored at the Expanding level, as per the NYSESLAT, with many of these students in third grade. This is most likely due to a strong foundation in language arts in the early childhood program at P.S. 203. The reading readiness skills learned, coupled with conversational opportunities afforded in the early childhood program, have helped propel these students to a higher level of proficiency. As the grades ascend, the number of Expanding students decreases, most likely due to their achievement of Commanding on the NYSESLAT in subsequent years after the primary grades. Commanding students make up 60 students, with the majority in fourth grade. The largest amount of students scoring at the Entering/Emerging level is in the kindergarten (8 students). This level is largely comprised of students who have just arrived from other countries. Newcomers comprise all of our Entering level students in the upper grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 55  PS 203 employs both horizontal and vertical teams. Inquiry teams (vertically aligned) have the opportunity to discuss any data (including the EDAT) to evaluate a problem of practice. In addition, horizontal teams (grade level and RTI Teams) have the opportunity to meet (during administrative periods) to discuss findings pertaining to ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELL students at P.S. 203 are held to the same high expectations and New York State Learning Standards as the rest of the student population. Results from various assessments, including the NYSESLAT, Fountas and Pinnell, and iReady diagnostic, are used to monitor student progress and drive instruction. Instructional time is maximized through regular consultation with mainstream classroom teachers and ELL teachers via weekly RTI meetings and professional development slots every Monday after school. Language and literacy skills are delivered through content area instruction to foster academic language. Modeling, bridging, and schema-building are among the scaffolding techniques incorporated into our instructional delivery. The staff is comprised of qualified and experienced pedagogues who receive appropriate and supportive professional development. The entire school community, including parents, local businesses and elected officials, are involved in the learning process through various programs. Students are grouped homogeneously according to proficiency level as determined by the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), and current grade level. PS 203 has two dually certified teachers (TESOL/COMMON BRANCH) who deliver integrated ENL/ELA or other content area services (Push in/Pull out model). Fully certified TESOL teachers deliver standalone ENL as a pull-out model and integrated ENL as a push-in model with the general education teacher. Pull-out groups are homogeneous in proficiency levels and push-in groups are heterogeneous. For the integrated portion, a total push-in model is implemented. Teachers coordinate with classrooms teachers to push-in during Reading and Writing workshop, as well as any STEAM activities (a push from District 26) to buttress the academic vocabulary of a core subject area. Stand-alone ENL services are coordinated between the ENL and general education teachers for the optimal time and strategies to give English language development instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instructional time is based on the ELL students' proficiency level as outlined in CR Part 154 Regulations. Thirty-two students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 360 total minutes of ENL instruction per week, divided into 180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Eighty-two students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Sixty-four students who have scored Commanding (Proficient) within the past two years receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction each week. A balanced-literacy approach is used to foster rapid assimilation of ELL students into the academic and social community of PS 203. Instruction is aligned to the New York State Next Generation Learning Standards. Explicit ENL is delivered through a balanced literacy approach which incorporates content area curriculum. The use of ENL methodology and instructional strategies, coupled with scaffolding 2018-19 CEP 56  learning, is the foundation of this approach. In order for students to develop critical thinking skills, problem-solving strategies, and communicate proficiently in English, educational programs utilized throughout the school scaffold students’ learning as they progress through stages of language acquisition. Effective practices such as Thinking Maps, graphic organizers, semantic maps, modeled writing, Backward Design, Sheltered English Instruction Approach (SIOP), and read alouds foster academic language development. Teachers utilize the Webb's Depth of Knowledge to tier their questions based upon student proficiency levels. ENL teachers teach to varied learning styles; encourage students to participate in class; give students more wait time (at least 15-20 seconds); use many visuals, including real-life pictures and videos, use physical activity, SMARTboards, Promethean Boards, Total Physical Response, model, role-play, act out; use concrete language and questions; incorporate the four skills of language acquisition: reading/writing/listening/speaking; and check understanding using "show me" techniques. ELA instruction is incorporated in the ENL classroom in addition to the mainstream classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Scientifically-based research on second language acquisition is the foundation of instructional planning and meeting the New York State Learning Standards for ELL students at P.S. 203. While the language of instruction at P.S. 203 is English, students’ native language literacy skills are taken into consideration in order to diversify instruction. Teachers understand that students need to be exposed to large amounts of comprehensible input to develop all areas of second language acquisition so they use the following strategies to accomplish this goal: In the primary classroom, oral language activities are emphasized to make content more comprehensible. The strategies used to help students in their listening and speaking include; giving an opinion (responding to a book), narrating (sharing a personal experience), describing (people, things, and story characters), giving instruction (how to make something, or steps in a lifecycle), and hypothesizing (what do you think will happen if…). Academic vocabulary is enhanced through access provided by teachers. Teachers understand the need for students to produce comprehensible output as well. For example, in an interactive classroom, the teacher engages in a dialogue with the students, and encourages more than single-word answers. To enrich language development, teachers use group work, in which ELL students have the opportunity to interact with many students who are more proficient in English and use language in a task oriented and meaningful way. This group work gives students who are less proficient in English the opportunity to build academic language from interaction with an English proficient partner. The process of writing occurs throughout the content areas. Teachers employ the Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop which allows them to implement strategies across a variety of genres to make writing meaningful for the ELL students. Mini-lessons, including ‘thinking aloud’ and modeling, demonstrate the writing process. Teachers use the Independent Investigation Method (IIM) with students to produce non-fiction writing pieces. Writing centers encourage independent work, as well as provide access to tools such as dictionaries, high-frequency words, and editing checklists. Students also write collaboratively in pairs and groups, providing less confident ELL students with good models for writing. Beginner students are allowed to write in their first language, and proficient speakers of the same language may translate to ease any shyness and anxiety these newcomers may have. The process of reading with beginner and intermediate ELL students includes using the Learning Progressions prescribed by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. Teachers will provide more complex texts with more time allotted to delve in-depth. Scaffolding strategies will figure prominently in this shift. Teachers will be providing as many non-verbal cues as possible by using pictures, real objects, demonstrations, gestures, and intonation cues. As students’ proficiency develops, prior knowledge is activated, using graphic organizers, Thinking Maps, hands-on learning activities, and cooperative learning. Teachers plan the language objectives for all lessons, introduce key vocabulary and use pre-reading strategies to help ELL students in their language development. There is an emphasis on academic vocabulary. Students are given the opportunity to use this vocabulary in oral and written form. Word walls, illustrations, real picture files, and art projects are used to help students organize and retain new vocabulary. Students are encouraged to write out vocabulary using pictures and add labels to the words. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students who score less than proficient on the NYSITELL are given a Spanish Language Assessment Battery to determine their proficiency in their native language. Additionally, the native languages of the ELL students are used 2018-19 CEP 57  throughout the school year in a variety of ways. The Imagine Learning program uses both the students' native language and English to evaluate the ELL progress. Students have the opportunity to refer to bilingual content-area glossaries, picture dictionaries, and English-native language dictionaries during the school day. Students who speak the ELL students’ native language are encouraged to translate for clarification. In the ENL classroom, ELL students are given the opportunity to write in their native language. This writing may be assessed for proficiency by a teacher who is fluent in the student's native language. ELL students, especially at the beginner and intermediate levels, may write their names in their native language, and are encouraged to share a greeting, such as "Good morning," in their native language. Welcome signs in numerous languages are present in the classroom. Students are never reprimanded for using a language other than English, but rather encouraged and rewarded for their attempts to use their new language. Interpreters are present throughout the building, and are provided for parent-teacher conferences as needed. Notes are sent home in English and the native language, if necessary 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Presently, there are no SIFE students at PS 203. However, there are steps in place to assist these students, should they enroll, in second language acquisition. In addition to providing the mandated ENL services, SIFE students are entitled to participate in any before and after school programs appropriate for their grade level. Based upon baseline, summative, and formative assessments, teachers will meet the child at where he or she is at performance-wise. In addition, SIFE students are entitled to all at-risk (or Tier III) services appropriate to their needs. b. Upon initial enrollment, all ELL students are given a newcomer package. Included in this package is the Oxford Picture Dictionary for Kids, the Oxford Picture Dictionary Translated Version, the Longman Picture Dictionary (with listening CDs), numerous native language content-language glossaries, various independent workbooks, a handwriting component, and a guide for the classroom teacher. This packet is designed for independent and partner use. Imagine Learning, a research-based, interactive language program, is used individually by newcomers to expedite conversational and academic English. Students can work at their own pace and alongside a peer who speaks their native language. Teachers are given tips to help make newcomers feel comfortable in their classrooms, as well as assessment guidelines and teaching strategies specific to ELL students. Test accommodations, including extended time and separate location are used for state tests. P.S. 203 offers math, science, and reading clubs to all ELL students, along with a self-sustaining after school homework help program. Furthermore, our Title III after school program is strictly for ELL students, and blends social and academic language with literacy strategies to help prepare students for the New York State ELA exam. c. For ELLs receiving services 4 to 6 years, academic language is modeled in the classroom in order for these students to transition from BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) to CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). Teachers strive to create a challenging setting where instruction is adjusted for students to work within their zone of proximal development. Instruction is aligned with the New York State Standards. A wide range of materials and strategies are incorporated into the methodology to support students understanding of academic content. Among these are accountable talk, turn-and-talks, read a-louds, a print-rich environment, shared reading texts, leveled libraries, writing and listening centers. Small group instruction, such as guided reading and math groups, and tutorials, is planned based upon various assessments.. Classroom and ENL teachers coordinate to design lessons that compliment content area instruction while taking different cognitive learning styles into consideration. Individual and group projects, oral presentations, and numerous writing samples are all used to assess the development of students’ progress and growth. ELL students are given the opportunity to utilize the computer lab and classroom computers, where various kinds of software and online Internet access are available to improve literacy, writing, and research skills. Materials used in order to teach the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are as follows: authentic literature with accompanied by digital records; charts, graphs, diagrams, visuals, graphic organizers, manipulative, computer resources, Oxford picture dictionaries; Imagine learning computer based program, Go Math Program, Passports to Social Studies, author study materials, and biographies. d. Every long-term ELL student will receive instruction specific to his or her individual needs, as per his or her Individualized Education Plan (IEP), if appropriate. Students who need to achieve proficiency in listening and speaking are grouped accordingly and are instructed with choral speaking, role-playing, puppetry, and storytelling. A balanced literacy 2018-19 CEP 58  approach will be utilized in providing assistance in reading and writing. The workshop model is coupled with various TESOL techniques, such as repetition, visual aids, modeling, and hands-on activities, to aid students in achieving proficiency in these modalities. Various instructional strategies and materials, as well as a focus on multiple forms of intelligences and scaffolding, will be used to enhance second language acquisition. Enrichment is built in to the school day to help these students achieve proficiency. e. Former ELL students receive services from a certified ENL pedagogue. This group meets two times per week for 45 minutes each session. Strategies taught help these former ELL students master some nuances of the English language that, although proficient, have proved to be a challenge for these students. Additionally, former ELL students receive extended time and separate location on all state and local examinations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a set of principles for curriculum development that give all individuals equal opportunities to learn. UDL provides a blueprint for creating instructional goals, methods, materials, and assessments that work for everyone--not a single, one-size-fits-all solution but rather flexible approaches that can be customized and adjusted for individual needs. Based on these principles, instructional strategies are incorporated so that all learners, including ELL-SWDs, have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. These teaching strategies and grade-level materials include Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), Imagine Learning interactive computer program, Thinking Maps, SMART/Promethean Boards, audio visual aids, Total Physical Response (TPR), picture and word cards, and the LEGO educational program, including coding. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs students are grouped by their proficiency on the NYSESLAT. This group receives content area instruction during their ENL periods. Students are mainstreamed in to the general education classroom whenever feasible and appropriate. A pupil personnel team (PPT) meets regularly to evaluate the progress of each student. Grade level meetings take place weekly to discuss the specific logistics for these students, as well as RTI meetings to identify and further refine any issues regarding these students. A number of our long-term ELLs are in self-contained special education classes with fully certified special education teachers. Other long-term ELLs also receive support services. Additional academic help is provided by our fully certified reading teacher. Resource room (SETSS) and ICT are provided for these students as indicated on their IEP by fully certified special-education teachers. Guidance counseling is also provided for those students in need by a fully certified guidance counselor. These interventions will occur throughout the school year to ensure that these students receive the attention and instruction they require in achieving proficiency in the English language. Teachers use the workshop model in both mathematics and ELA. As a result, teachers are able to gear the instruction specifically towards a child, based upon their ELL/SWD status (if applicable). 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P.S. 203 there are targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, science, and social studies. The Response To Intervention (RTI) team consists of the IEP teacher, SETSS provider, ENL teacher, reading specialist, speech and language teachers, as well as an occupational therapist, social worker, school psychologist, and a guidance counselor. The purpose of their meetings is to discuss the needs of struggling students and students with special needs. ELL students are supported with intervention services to help with difficulties beyond the acquisition of the second language. ELL students may receive SETSS services after an evaluation proves these services necessary. Additional support for these students includes speech therapy and occupational therapy. Special education students at P.S. 203 are either placed in self-contained classrooms, or general education classrooms with SETSS, with placement determined by the students’ IEP. If these students are entitled to stand-alone ENL services, they are pulled-out with mainstream ENL students. Instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of these students. ELL students placed in a self-contained special education classroom may receive the support of a bilingual paraprofessional. This paraprofessional accompanies the ELL student to the ENL room, assists with learning tasks in both 2018-19 CEP 59  English and the student's native language, and supports second language acquisition within the classroom. Targeted interventions programs include Fundations, which intervenes with students who have deficits in phonemic awareness. In addition, the IEP teacher is using the ASPIRE program as a Tier III intervention for students who need 1-1 focused intervention. A range of interventions services include: Reading Club (ELA AIS), Math Club ( Math AIS), and Tier III Instruction (by a interventionist). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based upon the data (particularly state exam scores), PS 203 drooped in math scores. PS 203 will be employing Picture Perfect Science and Hand-to-Mind STEAM. These research-based programs will allow all ELL students to improve their listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills to promote academic language as well as prepare students for 21st Century Learning within the realm of STEAM. In addition, Exemplars Math was bought in to buttress the Go Math! curriculum with more problem solving strategies and critical thinking prompts. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs at P.S. 203. Various clubs, including science, enrichment, drama, dance, and band are offered to all ELL students. All students are offered these opportunities via a sign-up sheet on a main bulletin board. Students may try out for as many clubs as they wish, but must choose three as to not interfere with academic learning. ELL students are encouraged to participate in class plays, dance festivals, field day, and student organizations. Additionally, ELLs are placed in various Gifted and Talented classes within the school as they are entitled to take the city test for these classes in their home language, if preferred. Furthermore, our Title III after school program is strictly for ELL students. PS 203 will be employing Picture Perfect Science and Hand-to-Mind STEAM, which also affords students supplemental services. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Various instructional strategies and materials, as well as a focus on multiple forms of intelligences and scaffolding, are used to enhance second language acquisition. All classrooms at P.S. 203 are equipped with SMART Boards and/or Promethean Boards which utilize Brainpop ESL, Imagine Learning, and ThinkCentral. In addition, the iReady platform is used to meet each student at their ability level and move them towards proficiency. This interactive technology keeps up with the pace of today's language learner and ensures multiple entry points within the learning process. ELL students are given the opportunity to utilize the computer lab and classroom computers, where various kinds of software and online Internet access are available to improve literacy, writing, and research skills. Materials used in order to teach the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are as follows: authentic literature with accompanying audio; charts, graphs, diagrams, visuals, graphic organizers, Thinking Maps, manipulatives, computer resources; Oxford picture dictionaries; TC Reading and Writing Project; Go Math Program; READY math and literacy program; Imagine Learning; author study materials, and biographies. Students study various genres, including poetry, historical fiction, narrative, non-fiction, realistic fiction, periodicals, and content area resources for shared reading. Entering/Emerging students receive and Imagine Learning account, which mostly focuses on phonics, concepts of print, and total reading. Transitioning students may receive scaffolded instruction using Tony Stead's Exploration in Non-Fiction writing. Expanding/Commanding students receive grade-level materials using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL classroom the native languages of the ELL students are used throughout the school year in a variety of ways. Students have the opportunity to refer to bilingual content-area glossaries, picture dictionaries, and English-native language dictionaries during the school day. Students who speak the ELL students’ native language are allowed to translate, especially in content area subjects. This content writing is assessed by a teacher who is fluent in the students' native language for signs of proficiency in that language. ELL students, especially at the beginner and intermediate levels, may write their names in their native language, and are encouraged to share a greeting, such as good morning, in their native language. Welcome signs in 2018-19 CEP 60  numerous languages, coupled with multilingual labels are present in the school building. Students are never reprimanded for using a language other than English, but rather encouraged and rewarded for their attempts to use their new language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are not grouped together with more than two grade levels (as per Part 154). Required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. For example, stemming from previous information in this document, all curricula is geared towards the specific age and grade level of a student. Teachers plan together to make sure that all scaffolds and support are grade-level and age appropriate. Students’ academic and social development is enhanced in an environment where they are able to engage in the learning process with peers. Information gathered from academic records, from parents, and through the initial assessment informs programming in the age-appropriate classroom and determines the amount and type of ENL and required services support. English language learners have the double challenge of learning the language of instruction while they are learning the grade-level curriculum. When the necessary curriculum accommodations or modifications are in place, students can successfully participate in all content areas even at beginning levels of English proficiency. Instructors utilize the necessary scaffolding to differentiate lessons in the subject areas so that all students have access to the content material. The practical and interactive nature of some subject areas, such as the arts, health and physical education, and some aspects of science and technology, may make them especially accessible for English language learners.Some students may arrive with limited prior schooling. With informed and flexible support from the ENL teachers and from classroom teachers, learning can be accelerated by building background content knowledge and by supporting language development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a - PS 203 does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Translated materials are available in the school office upon enrollment of ELL students and their families regarding school procedures and language preference. For students entering kindergarten in the upcoming school year, there is an orientation in the late spring. Translators are provided and materials are distributed in multiple languages. There are orientations for each grade, as well as an ELL parent orientation. A PTA welcome night also helps newly enrolled students and their families acclimate to their new school environment. Packets with translated glossaries and other pertinent information are also distributed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? While there are no language electives offered in an elementary school, P.S. 203 does offer an introduction to the Spanish language. Students from the Cardozo High School "Bumble Bees" program volunteer on a weekly basis to come into the classrooms and teach our students Spanish vocabulary and phrases. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 2018-19 CEP 61  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers at P.S. 203 attend all ENL Liaison meetings offered by the Queens borough offices, New York Historical Society, DELLSS, and DSISS. In addition, other workshops and programs for staff development are attended throughout the school year. Common branch teachers, subject area teachers, and special education teachers are encouraged to attend ELL workshops offered by the Department of English Language Learners (DELL). Professional development will be offered during the Chancellor's Conference day in November and on the Chancellor's Conference Day on June. Teachers also participate in Teachers College Workshops that focus on ELLs; each teacher turnkeys what they have learned to the rest of the staff. Our ELL teachers provide professional development in second language learning, covering strategies for scaffolding and integrating content area instruction with second language goals. Teachers are given assistance in methodology and approaches for ELL students in the classroom, as well as assessment alternatives for these children. Staff development continues throughout the term during the professional development time on Mondays. Teachers are encouraged to view the Office of English Language Learners (OELL) emails regarding further staff development for pedagogues, as well as attend workshops for ELL training. Teachers maintain their own record keeping regarding their training. Assistant principals, as well as all staff members, are provided professional development through the Borough Field Support Center (Queens). ENL workshops are constantly being promoted. They also are invited to attend RTI meetings where, along with speech therapists and our school psychologist, they can be a part of the discussion pertaining to ELLs. Secretaries also attend professional development on the ENL identification process. In addition, during Monday professional development sessions, all staff members can consult with ELL personnel at the school, including paraprofessionals. In addition, professional development is provided for our Imagine Learning program, geared specifically for ENL/ENL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development will be offered during the Chancellor's Conference day in November, and on the Chancellor's Conference. More specifically, PD will be given to all teachers in how assess ELLs using MSV in Fountas and Pinnell. In addition, our special-education liaison will be giving PD in the ways to scaffold instruction for ELL students using the RTI process. Our ENL teacher will be attending "Using Technology to Enhance English Language Learning for ELLs" through the QBNFSC. One of our ENL teachers will also be attending professional development at Teachers College: Develop a Toolkit of Methods to Support ELLs in Becoming Stronger Readers and Writers. Our ELL teachers provide professional development in second language learning, covering strategies for scaffolding and integrating content area instruction with second language goals. All teachers are given assistance in methodology and approaches for ELL students in the classroom, as well as assessment alternatives for these children. Staff development continues throughout the school year during the allotted citywide professional development time on Mondays. Teachers are encouraged to view the Office of English Language Learners (OELL) emails regarding further staff development for pedagogues, as well as attend workshops for ELL training. Teachers maintain their own record keeping regarding their training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 203 provides annual individual meetings by sending an invitation to parents. This invitation conveys that the ENL staff members may meet with them on Tuesday afternoons from 2:40 - 3:55. In addition, the goals of the program, as well as the language development needs are conveyed to the parents during this meeting. These invitations are translated into the 2018-19 CEP 62  student's home language. The invitations are posted on the school website to increase transparency among the school community. Translators are always available within the school for these meetings. To document the parents who attend a meeting, sign in sheets are provided and documented accordingly and kept in the ENL room. Also, communication is conveyed through Twitter (@PS203Q) on the school's upcoming events. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is seen throughout P.S. 203, especially with assemblies for school plays and events, PTA meetings, and fundraisers. Parents are welcome to share stories, songs, dances, and experiences in their native language, as evident in our annual Lunar New Year celebration. At this event, parents share their culture through food, music, and artwork, and are involved at every step, from planning dances and musical pieces, to offering a taste of their native cuisine. The definitive message to ALL parents is that using their own language with their children will assist in their child’s progress and not hamper their English language learning. P.S. 203 has a balanced School Leadership Team along with an active PTA. Communication with parents is ongoing, with every child having a daily communication notebook that parents use frequently. Workshops are well attended. Parents are involved in and invited to all activities held in the school, including the concerts, dance festivals, and drama productions. The parent coordinator also has an integral role to promote parent involvement within the school. Debra Halpern not only is in constant communication with parents, but she also sends monthly newsletters keeping the parents apprised of all PS 203 initiatives and endeavors. She also works in conjunction with the PTA to promote more parent outreach. Documents are translated into the parents' home language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All stakeholders share in the goal of each and every English Language Learner meeting the high standards set for all of our students. Great care, attention, and dutiful planning are provided for these students to achieve their goals at P.S. 203 and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deborah Ann Florio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 203Q: Oakland Gardens School DBN: 26Q203 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deborah A. Florio Title Principal Ai-Huei Chang-Lau Assistant Principal Debra Halpern Parent Coordinator Stacey Silverman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Donna Korniewicz Parent Jordan Simons Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Voula Angelidakis n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Reading Teacher Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 06/29/17 n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26q203 School Name: Oakland Gardens School Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Debra Halpern Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. a. HLIS survey b. ATS RPOB report c. ELL parent orientations d. NYC DOE Home Language preference letter e. Survey to each classroom teacher requesting additional identification of families they also feel would benefit from receiving translated materials. f. RHLA report g. Blue Emergency Cards h. RAPL report i.RESI report 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 0 112 0 784 21 6 5 0 1 0 n/a n/a n/a Albanian Chinese Dari-Farsi-Persian English Korean Spanish Urdu Mandarin Macedonian Mossi n/a n/a n/a 0 12.06 0 84.39 2.26 .65 .54 0 0.11 0 n/a n/a n/a 1 114 1 771 22 4 5 9 1 1 n/a n/a n/a 0.11 12.27 0.11 82.99 2.37 .43 .54 .97 0.11 0.11 n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Written materials that are generated for immediate distribution and therefore may not be sent to T&I are Ongoing, September 2018-June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Utilize DOE translations provided on WEB site and send documents to Translation Dept 2018-19 CEP 67  sent home with a multi-language header announcing that the documents are important and to please have the document translated into home language. Thses documents include: Monthly newsletters: Ongoing Parent Handbook: September Documents that may be sent to T&I include: NYS Testing: February School wide events: Ongoing Parent resources in the Community: Ongoing n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Tuesday 40 minute parent engagement time September Back to School Night November Parent Teacher Conferences Open School Week March Parent Teacher Conferences May End of Year Night PTA meetings IEP meetings & annual reviews International Feasts Class Plays, Publishing parities n/a n/a n/a Ongoing. September 2018-June, 2019 In-house translators and calling the over the phone translator department n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. we will send a robo call through school messenger. the service allows us to send translated versions of the messages. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A-663 is distributed to all staff in the beginning of each school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signage is in the Main Lobby. "I Speak" cards available. Language Access Kit materials utilized. The Regulations are available in the Main Office, in the PTA room and at the Parent Coordinator’s desk, including Parents Bill of Rights. The school regularly refers parents/guardians to the DOE website for additional translation information and translated versions of documents and resources Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey Data analysis of School Survey responses Informal anecdotal accounts Focus group meetings in November, February and May with PTA Executive Board and SLT parents 2018-19 CEP 69 
