2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q210 School Name: J.H.S. 210 ELIZABETH BLACKWELL Principal: KULJIT SINGH 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: ElizabethBlackwell Middle School 27Q210 School Number (DBN): BEDS Code: 342700010210 Grades Served: School Address: 6, 7, 8 93-11 101st AVENUE,OZONE PARK, NEW YORK 11416 718-845-5942 718- 845-4037 Phone Number: Fax: KuljitV. Singh ksingh@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: KuljitV. Singh Arthur Zander Elizabeth Calva RoselynBurnett Sherry Azim N/A N/A Beacon District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 520-6743 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KuljitV. Singh Arthur Zander Elizabeth Calva Kaliopi Tepelidis Marta Kargol Anthony Ferrara *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roslyn Burnett Gloria Palau Pamela Sewprashad Stephanie Morra Marabelle Williamson Regina Lukas Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Elizabeth Blackwell MS 210Q holds the unwavering belief that all children have the inalienable right to a quality education in a safe and nurturing environment that allows them to develop into cognitive, self-directed, socially responsible, well-rounded young adults. By offering robust Academic programs, rich Arts programs, as well as stimulating Extracurricular activities, we will achieve our vision of holistically preparing our students to meet the challenges of College and Career readiness. We will also collaborate with our families and community to foster a sense of lifelong learning to enable our students to achieve the highest levels of success possible. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. MS 210Q is a middle school in Ozone Park, Queens with 1,881 students, serving grades 6-8. The school’s population is comprised of 60.0% Hispanic, 3.35% Native American, 28% Asian, 1.09% Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, 6% Black, 3% White and .45% Multi-Racial. The student body also includes 17% Special Education students and 15% English Language Learners. Boys account for 50.36% of the students enrolled, while girls account for 49.40%. The average attendance rate for the school for SY 2017-2018 was 92.3% and average class size is 30 students. MS 210Q’s mission is to prepare students for the rigorous demands of the academic and work worlds so they may reach their potential as self-directed, creative and socially responsible individuals. To this end, we offer a program complimented by our updated technology (SmartBoards, Promethean boards, Chromebooks, Laptops, iPads, Document cameras), in addition to our expanding Arts program, which includes visual arts, band/music, dance, and theater/drama. Our goal is to provide a rigorous, challenging, yet balanced, creative, and comprehensive education which best supports our students during, what can be best described as, a very critical and pivotal time in their lives. Our ultimate goal is to create adept, autonomous, independent, responsible and reflective individuals who are prepared to take on the rigors of high school, college and eventually a career. To support these goals, we have established partnerships with "I Will Graduate" through College Access for All and The Queens Community House Beacon Program, which is an after school program that serves many of our students. College Access for All builds college-consciousness in our seventh grade students to support better decision making in grade eight through high school; and since we are a Title 1 school, Queens Community House Beacon affords many students the necessary after school support they need in the areas of homework help, while providing extracurricular activities such as basketball, and soccer. Teacher pedagogy is strengthened through our instructional coaches and content area lead teachers. As a result of collaboration with this team and administration, our professional learning plan is tailored to meet individual and departmental needs to support continued student achievement. As a result of our expanding academy structure and Arts program, our students are fortunate enough to gain exposure to various career choices and showcase their talents during our Winter and Spring Festival of the Arts. This early exposure to premier Fine Arts experiences elevates their confidence and leaves an indelible mark in their middle school memory. In 2017-2018, the number of students attaining proficiency on the both the New York State (NYS) ELA and the NYS Math exams increased. To continue with this momentum of improvement, our ELA department, along with the Math, Science, and Social Studies departments will continue our work with WordGen, a Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) literacy based program. To continue to increase student proficiency levels in Math, the Math department continues to work with Go Math, but now supplements with task-driven lessons that cultivate problem solving skills and perseverance with additional instructional time as supported by Algebra for All. Math Teachers will have the opportunity to work with an instructional Coach that will provide individual attention and feedback as well as department professional development opportunities during common planning and contractual professional learning time. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  ENL - Language acquisition, Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL SWD - Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL Lowest Third - Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), UDL 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The staff at MS 210Q, made the most progress in strategically refining units of study to promote coherence across the grades and content area. We will continue to focus on Collaborative Teaching from the Framework for Great Schools as well a Rigorous Instruction and School Leadership in the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q210 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1880 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 146 144 35 49 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 89 79 13 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.7% % Reduced Lunch 16.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.4% 59.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.23 1% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities YES NO NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YSH NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 152 155 13 92.1% 4.8% 16.3% 5.1% 28.8% 2.7% 10 9% 9 28.6% 43% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES YES N/A NO YES NO NO N/A NO NO YES NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from the 2017-2018 Quality Review indicate that school leaders and faculty make purposeful decisions to ensure that curricula are aligned to the instructional shifts and the Common Core Learning Standards. Curricular tasks consistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher order skills across grades and subject areas for all students, including ENLs and students with disabilities. On the other hand, this data indicates that across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provide effective questioning, scaffolds or prompts to engage students in curricular tasks. In addition, student work and discussions during instruction reflect uneven levels of thinking and participation. According to the 2017-2018 school year data, there was an increase in the number of students that met the State ELA and Math cut scores. Our focus will be to continue to increase the number of students that meet and exceed state standards in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Moreover, based upon the 2017-2018 MOTP observations, teachers need to continue to develop lessons promoting student engagement through intellectually engaging content and well designed learning tasks and activities to meet our students' diverse needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will develop rigorous instruction as measured by a 5% increase in student achievement in grades 6-8 as measured by the 2018-2019 DRP Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Monthly Teachers and paraprofessionals Daily Monthly Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Borough Support Specialists, consultants, Math Coach, Literacy Coach Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue to send key personnel to Professional Learning Opportunities (PLOs) that focus on designing coherent instruction and student engagement. Staff members will be given the opportunity to turn-key new information and showcase best practices. All teachers and paraprofessionals will continue to be part of a common planning and professional learning community where they will have opportunities to plan in vertical and horizontal teams to develop well designed learning tasks and activities. They will continue to analyze data looking at the standards/skills that the students need additional support. We will continue to expose students to content and language objectives which are the essential concepts and skills that they must master at the end of the school year. Academic vocabulary will continue to be taught in all classes. We will implement the MSQI strategies of Word Generation along with content vocabulary (language acquisition strategies) to assist in vocabulary acquisition and usage across the content areas. Across the grades, independent reading will continue to be part of the ELA curriculum during double periods. This year we will incorporate independent reading during the AM homeroom period. We will continue to utilize the Socratic Seminars and Philosophical Chairs strategies to facilitate listening and speaking skills into forums that promote critical thinking skills. Within 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  these sessions, students construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others. Furthermore, staff will continue to inter-visit with District Schools and MSQI schools to observe best practices focusing on student engagement. Our staff will continue to revise the curriculum and utilize interdisciplinary approaches to teaching as well as Universal Design for Learning strategies. Our Instructional team will incorporate PBL assignments and strategies for all major units of study and provide workshops to support staff implementation. They will also infuse 21st century skills, next generation science standards and technological skills within the curricula. To align end of unit assessments to CCSS, teachers will continue to use state released CCSS test questions that correlate with each unit, so student become familiar with the structure, language, text complexity and expectations. Uniform end of unit assessments will continue to be administered at the end of each unit of study in the major content areas. These we will continue to scan into School-net where teachers are afforded the opportunity to analyze data, monitor student progress as well as create groups based on standards and skills mastery. The instructional team will continue to utilize the student assessment data to identify trends across content and grades in order to provide support in the core classes and in Academic Intervention Services. Currently Math, Science and ELA teachers have chrome books to supplement their teaching. The goal is to have Social Studies teachers with chrome books as well. Teachers of students with disabilities, the lowest third and English Language Learners will be part of vertical and horizontal common planning and professional learning teams. Here they Students with disabilities, the lowest third and Daily Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  will collaborate with general education teachers to utilize UDL strategies to ensure these subgroups master the content and the skills. These teachers will employ the parallel and co-teaching models within ICT settings. English Language learners Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Model Borough Support Specialists, Consultants During their common planning and classroom instruction, teachers will focus on strategies that will engage and enhance the learning for all students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Teachers of ENL students will receive targeted language objectives to encourage language acquisition for all ENL subgroups. Teachers of ENL and SWD will continue to use laptop carts with Chrome books or iPads for each individual student. We will continue to provide literacy and math common core materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level. One of our major goals this year is to provide parents with resources needed to assist our students with homework and assignments. We will continue to update our new website and App. Parents will have more access to staff and become aware of events and activities. To incorporate trust, the school community will be provided with the opportunity to comfortably share their concerns with other teachers and share decision making based upon effective teaching strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Monthly Principal, Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Parent Coordinator Teachers Daily All staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  We will provide literacy and math common core resources to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level. This will be provided by the ENL teachers, Math and Literacy Coaches, Consultants and content teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be needed for staff to conduct parent workshops on weekends and/or after school as well as other activities after school related to the above mentioned action plan. There will be contracted vendor costs and cost of coverages for teacher meetings with Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants and Guidance Counselors. Technological resources and other relevant instructional materials will be needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will integrate common core aligned formative assessments to evaluate students’ mastery of concepts and provide timely, rigorous progress monitoring resulting in a 2.5% increase of students scoring at or above proficiency as measured by the mid-year ELA benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP diagnostic and progress monitoring, baseline and benchmark assessments, daily formative assessments, end of unit assessments aligned to summative assessments, third party diagnostic and progress monitoring. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A review of attendance data reflects that currently for the 2018-2019 school year, the average daily attendance is at 93.9%. This is a 1.6% increase from last year. In addition, there is a Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) system which is used to engage and support students behaviorally. There is close interpersonal interaction with students and staff as based upon the “Academy” structure and advisory, every student is well known by staff. For the 2018-2019 school year there is a dedicated social worker responsible for social emotional learning, peer mediation and restorative circles to improve the culture of the school. This social emotional learning has aided in students’ social, emotional and academic development. However, there is still additional work to be done in this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% reduction in incidents as reported in OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, COSA, Social Worker, Guidance Counselors, Deans MSQI Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Borough Support Specialists, Consultants Staff will continue to utilize PBIS supports such as a mentoring program, College Access for All, intramural sports, Respect for All, book buddies with our feeder school and our student council to effectively meet students’ social and emotional needs. Students in Grades 6-8, teachers, Paraprofessionals Daily and monthly Monthly We will continue to utilize our dedicated social worker who will be head of our Social Emotional Learning program and work with our Peer Mediation Facilitator. Daily Monthly Monthly Furthermore, our Coordinator of Student of Activities will continue to plan monthly Academy assemblies that foster academic, social and emotional learning helps to support students’ academic and social growth. The student council members will continue to be the voice of the students. Our dedicated attendance teacher and the borough field attendance teacher will continue to make home visits to chronically absent students. Staff will continue to receive training to support staff in the implementation of student supports, classroom management, mindsets and academic and personal behaviors. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  We will utilize the “Brain Power” program to assist students and staff to monitor their social and emotional traits. Boys and girls mentoring programs will continue and foster positive behaviors as well as college and career readiness. New peer mediation groups will be introduced and implemented in order to address students’ conflicts, frustrations and social/emotional needs in order to train students to be facilitators of positive peer relationships. To build self esteem amongst our female students, we have initiated The Beautiful Me Project. This will be led by our Social Worker. Students will continue to have access to incentive based events such as Spring Fling and Snow Ball dances, Talent Show, Field Day and PBIS field trips. Staff will be trained in restorative circles and TCI in an attempt to understand the social, emotional needs of our students. Students With Disabilities, the lowest third and English Language Learners will be actively involved in all of our specialized programs based upon their IEP goals, and /or individual social and emotional needs. Students participating in the ACES program will receive life skills training, adaptive physical education, yoga, theater arts and educational field trips. The school will continue to provide parents with training and information needed to become actively involved in their children’s, social emotional development centered on making the right choices in life. We will continue to update our new website and App. Parents will have more access to staff and become aware of events and activities. Daily Students With Disabilities, the lowest third and English Language learners Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, Model Exemplar Teachers, Borough Support Specialists, Consultants, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker Parents Monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Deans, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  We will offer parents referrals to programs and services that will assist them with parental needs around attendance, absenteeism and behavioral supports. To facilitate an inclusive school environment and incorporate trust, staff will be trained in strategies and protocols around changing of mindsets through Restorative Circles and academic behavior which build relationships ensuring students feel safe and comfortable with them. Teachers Monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Consultants, Teachers, Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize resources such as Consultants, Borough Support Personnel, Assistant Principal responsible for Security, Guidance Counselors , Social Worker and Parent Coordinator to provide parents with training and information needed to become actively involved in their children’s, social emotional development centered on making the right choices in life. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be needed for staff to conduct parent workshops on weekends and/or after school as well as other activities after school related to the above mentioned action plan. There will be contracted vendor costs and cost of coverages for teacher meetings with Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants and Guidance Counselors. Technological resources and other relevant instructional materials will be needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  By February 2019, the school will implement behavioral supports to foster the social and emotional development of all students resulting in a 2.5% reduction in the number of suspensions as measured by 2019 January OORS data report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will utilize OORS data, suspension reports, teacher and dean referrals, Guidance logs and reports, mentoring logs, Social Worker mentoring logs to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from the 2017-2018 Quality Review show that the majority of teachers participate in structured, inquiry-based collaborations. Structures are in place to support distributed teacher leadership. Distributed leadership structures are in place encouraging teacher leaders input in strategic decisions that affect school policy and student achievement. Teachers have opportunities to develop leadership capacity, and have a voice in decisions that impact teaching and learning across the school. According to the 2017-2018 school year data, there was an increase in the number of students that met the State ELA and Math cut scores. Our focus will be to continue to increase the number of students that meet and exceed state standards in both ELA and Math. Moreover, based upon the 2017-2018 MOTP observations, teachers need to continue to strengthen their common assessment practices to monitor daily student progress in order to make instructional adjustments, offer clear next steps and provide more students self-assessment opportunities. Therefore, although teachers are meeting in teams to look at student work, analyze data, modify the curriculum, and share best practices the data shows that there was not an increase but rather a decline in the performance of lowest third, ENL and Students With Disabilities in Math, ELA and Science. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in structured Professional Learning Communities to improve pedagogical practices resulting in a 5% increase in teachers migrating from Effective to Highly Effective for Danielson Competency 3c- Student Engagement as measured in ADVANCE for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will collaborate each Monday and Tuesday, as well as during teacher teams, to engage in activities such as analyzing relevant screening and diagnostic data, analyzing student work, formative assessments, UDL strategies, progress monitoring, response to data and shared beliefs on how students learn best, sharing best practices in order to encourage increased teacher effectiveness so as to increase student learning in Math, ELA and Science. Teachers Weekly Daily Monthly Monthly All teachers and paraprofessionals will be part of a professional learning community during Monday PLOs where they will have opportunities to engage in professional discussions. Select staff will lead these teams to turn key relevant professional developments and assist teachers in incorporating strategies into their instruction. We will continue to analyze student data, identify inconsistencies in teacher practice and create action plans to formulate instructional strategies to improve teacher pedagogy and student outcomes. Staff will visit district schools and MSQI schools to view best practices within teacher teams. Math teachers will continue to utilize Algebra for All strategies in the classroom in conjunction with Generation Ready. Teachers will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  receive off-site professional development from Algebra for All and on-site training from Generation Ready. Teachers of Special Education will be involved in the above mentioned strategies. Teachers Weekly Teachers of Students With Disabilities, the lowest third and English Language Learners will continue to collaborate with general education teachers, during common planning/teacher teams and on Mondays and Tuesdays to share, revise and adapt instructional techniques, lesson and unit plans based upon students IEP and/or their individual needs. During their common planning and classroom instruction, science teachers will focus on strategies that will engage and enhance the learning for all students including Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners. They will discuss the ways in which they can improve student success by starting at their entry points and using formative assessments and progress monitoring to track their progress. Parents will meet on Tuesdays with teachers for Student Led Conferences to discuss student goals and academic progress that promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry. The school will also provide resources to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels in all academic areas. Daily Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants Parents Weekly, Monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Deans, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants We will continue to update our new website and App. Parents will have more access to staff and become aware of events and activities. To understand needs and incorporate trust, teachers will work collaboratively in horizontal, vertical and/or interdisciplinary teacher teams to establish student goals that promote high levels of student achievement in all academic areas. Teachers Daily, Weekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Student Led Conferences on Tuesdays teachers will meet with parents and students to discuss academic progress and activities that promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry. The school will also provide resources to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be needed for staff to conduct parent workshops on weekends and/or after school as well as other activities after school related to the above mentioned action plan. There will be contracted vendor costs and cost of coverages for teacher meetings with Borough Support Specialists, consultants and coaches. Technological resources and other relevant instructional materials will be needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will have participated in PLOs to improve pedagogical practice resulting in a 2.5% increase in teachers migrating from Effective to Highly Effective in Danielson Competency 3c- Student Engagement as measured in Measured in Advance for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observations, as well as ADVANCE data will be utilized to assess teacher progress within Competency 3c- Student Engagement. Teacher team / inquiry team agendas will include best practices to promote student engagement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from the 2017-2018 Quality Review indicates that across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provide effective questioning, scaffolds or prompts to engage students in curricular tasks. In addition, student work and discussions during instruction reflect uneven levels of thinking and participation. Distributed leadership structures are in place encouraging teacher leaders input in strategic decisions that affect school policy and student achievement. However, the June 2018 Advance data shows that across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provide effective questioning, scaffolds or prompts to engage students in curricular tasks. Questioning and discussion, assessment and engaging students in learning are instructional strategies that need to be addressed. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will be provided PLOs to improve practice resulting in a 5% increase in teachers migrating from Effective to Highly Effective in Danielson Competency 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion as measured by ADVANCE. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students in Grades 6-8 Monthly Daily, Weekly, Monthly Daily, Weekly, Monthly Daily, weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, MSQI, Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Borough Support Specialists, Consultants Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will continue to conduct norming activities and attend workshops to hone their skills to assist teachers in becoming effective and highly effective pedagogues in higher order questioning and discussion techniques, engaging students in learning and assessment in instruction. Administrators will continue to provide support through the use of Depth of Knowledge (DOK), Cognitive Rigor Matrix, UDL, Socratic Seminars, and Philosophical Chairs. Administrators will continue to provide opportunities for teachers to participate in professional learning community activities centered on the Danielson Framework - instructional strategies, UDL, unit planning, assessment in instruction, progress monitoring, checks for understanding, co-teaching models. Administrators will continue to provide immediate effective feedback after observations and provide opportunities for inter-visitations to visit exemplar classrooms and additional support for targeted teachers, and assign teacher mentors to assist new staff members with their acclimation to the school. Administrators will continue to work with Lead teachers and coaches to support teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Administrators will provide opportunities for teachers in the scaffolding of higher order questions for Students With Disabilities, students in the lowest third and English Language Learners. These will be included in lesson and unit plans. They will utilize UDL strategies within their lessons. Administrators will invite district representatives to run professional development sessions for ENL instructional strategies. Administrators will ensure resources and other opportunities become available for science teachers that incorporate instructional strategies that will engage and enhance the learning for students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Administrators will encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. They will facilitate workshops based on leadership qualities, language acquisition, technology, budget etc. We will continue to update our new website and App. Parents will have more access to staff and become aware of events and activities. To understand needs and incorporate trust, teachers will share best practices and conduct inter-visitations. Furthermore, students will build on each other’s ideas during class discussions. Students with disabilities, students in the lowest third and English Language Learners Daily, Weekly, Monthly Daily, Weekly, Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers of Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners, SETSS teacher, MSQI Coordinator, ICT teachers, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, ENL Teacher, Borough Field Support Specialist All parents of students in grades 6-8 Weekly, Monthly Teachers and Assistant Principals, coaches, parent coordinator Weekly, Monthly Students in grades 6-8 and all teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, classroom teachers, MSQI Coordinator, Exemplar Teachers, Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants, Teachers and students of grades 6-8 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  We will encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. Parents will be provided with leadership training based on leadership qualities, language acquisition, technology, budget etc. These skills and strategies will enable them to support their child(ren) learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be needed for staff to conduct parent workshops on weekends and/or after school. There will be contracted vendor costs and cost of coverages for teacher meetings with coach. Technological resources, materials based upon DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, and other relevant instructional materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase in Danielson Competency 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion as measured by ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observations, as well as ADVANCE data will be utilized to assess teacher progress within Competency 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion. Teacher team / inquiry team agendas will include best practices to promote questioning and student discussion. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school continues to improve in the communication metric under school culture. Logs and parent outreach data for the 2017-2018 school year show an increase in the number of parents contacted. The majority of parents within our school community indicate that the school keeps them informed about their child’s academic progress. There is continued partnership with Beacon which is the main CBO within our building. However, we still lag our peer group citywide average. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to dedicate our focus on this area as parental involvement and participation is crucial to student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  By June 2019, the school will develop a collaborative partnership with families and CBOs resulting in a 10% increase in parent involvement as measured by parent attendance during Parent Coordinator parent workshops, PTA meetings, as well as the parent outreach log activity from SLC Tuesdays and feedback from the Parent Learning Environment Surveys. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Within their professional learning community, staff will receive training based upon strategies to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency so as to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Daily, weekly Weekly, monthly Weekly, monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Deans, PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Borough Support Specialists, Consultants All parents and teachers will be invited to attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings (SLC Tuesday Parent Meetings. SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, Title I Parent Committee, PA or PTA) to inform and strengthen the parent and school community connection. We will organize events for families and teachers such as Healthy Home Workshops, Winter/Spring concerts, Science Fair, Senior Awards, NJHS Ceremony, Broadway Jr. Productions, Art Exhibition, GED and ESL Parent Programs, Eye exams and Asthma workshops. Parent teacher conferences will be in the form of Student Led Conferences and teachers will receive training on SLCs. During the SLC the students will lead the meeting as they show their parents their work and explain their grades. Here they are held accountable for their learning and all students including SWD, ENL and struggling students can articulate and show at least one piece of work. To address the needs of Students With Disabilities, the lowest third English Language Learners, and overage students, parents and teachers of these students will be encouraged to participate and attend all scheduled meetings and Tuesday’s Parent Engagement. Parents and Teachers Weekly. monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, teachers, Deans, PTA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  The school will use PupilPath to allow parents 24 hour access to student grades, completion of assignments, attendance and punctuality, a monthly school calendar and letters that are translated in the dominant languages of the student body: Spanish, Urdu, Bengali, Chinese, Korean, French and an on-line parent survey to promote parent/teacher collaboration. We will continue to use school messenger in the form of text and voice messages. We aim to utilize social media (Facebook) to keep parents abreast of events. Parents Daily, weekly, monthly President, Parent Coordinator, Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Deans, PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist, Programmer, Teachers We will continue to use school messenger in the form of text and voice messages. We aim to utilize social media (Facebook) to keep parents abreast of events. We will continue to update our new website and App. Parents will have more access to staff and become aware of events and activities. We will offer parents referrals to programs and services that will assist them with parental needs around attendance, absenteeism and behavioral supports. We will continue to have weekly parent communication to provide curriculum updates. We will provide literacy and math common core resources to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level. One of our major goals this year is to provide parents with material needed to assist our students with homework and assignments. To incorporate trust, parents and teachers are encouraged to participate and attend in all scheduled parent and school meetings to increase and strengthen the school/ parent connection. Parents and Teachers Weekly, monthly Principal Assistant Principal, Borough Field Support Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Deans, Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Coordinator, PTA President, Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We currently have a Beacon in our building. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be needed for staff to conduct parent workshops on weekends and/or after school as well as other activities after school related to the above mentioned action plan. There will be contracted vendor costs and cost of coverages for teacher meetings with Borough Field Support Specialists, Consultants and Guidance Counselors. Technological resources and other relevant instructional materials will be needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community based organizations resulting in a 2.5% increase in parent attendance and participation in Student Led Conferences as measured by attendance at meetings, Tuesday parent outreach logs and feedback from monthly parent surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Visitors’ logs, parent engagement logs, the number of parents attending workshops, parental outreach on pupilpath, parent attendance at parent teachers’ conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are found to be at-risk of failing based on poor performance on formal assessments,classwork, homework and projects and students who are not meeting the goals of their IEP. In addition all those students who scored a level 1 or 2 on the ELA state exams and the diagnostic assessment taken in September. Mathematics Students who are found to be at-risk of failing due to over age, based on poor performance on formal assessments and classwork, homework and projects and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small group and one on one Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) DRP reading assessment will be administered 3 times a year for progress monitoring. The Test of Silent Word ReadingFluency(TOSWRF) will also be implemented to provide diagnostics and differentiated instruction to meet the needs of individual students. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The afterschool and Title III program meet weekly for two hours and fifteen minutes. SETSS and ESL teachers also work with small groups of students on reading and writing strategies during the day. Teachers of ENL and SWD will receive laptop carts with Chrome books for each individual student Computer assisted programs such as BrainPop, NewsELA, Flocabulary, Gizmo,and Boardworkswill support instruction in the ELA classrooms. All students use the accompanying computer assisted program to Go Math!. Go Math! will also be usedto provide diagnostics and differentiated instruction small group and one on one Students will also receive academic intervention services during the school day as this is built into the program. During the school day, teachers work with whole and small groups to enhance skills needed for test sophistication, test taking strategies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  students who are not meeting the goals of their IEP. In addition all those students who scored a level 1 or 2 on the math state exams and the diagnostic assessment taken in September. to meet the needs of individual students. Teachers of ENL and SWD will receive laptop carts with Chrome books for each individual student. Computer assisted programs such as BrainPop,Flocabulary, Gizmo,and Boardworks support instruction in the Math classrooms. Science small group and one on one Students who are found to be at-risk of failing due to overage, poor performance on formal assessments and classwork, homework and projects as well as students who are not meeting the goals of their IEP. Students use supplemental reading and hands on science material to enhance skills. Teachers will receive laptop carts with Chrome books for each individual student. Online labs and resources will provide supplemental support with content based text. Computer assisted programs such as BrainPop,Flocabulary, Gizmo,and Boardworks and instruction to help students who are struggling to meet the goals for students that have IEPs and are level 1 & 2 based on the 2017-2018NYS CC Math Assessment. Title I and Title III programs meet weekly for two hours. During the school day, SETSS and ESL teachers work with small groups of students on effective problem solving strategies. Students will also receive academic intervention services during the school day as this is built into the program. Title III Saturday science program will supports LEPs during the spring season of 2019 in preparation for the NYS science assessment. Students will also receive academic intervention services during the school day as this is built into the program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SETSS teachers work with small groups of grade 8 students during the day complete the required exit projects and performance tasks. Students will also receive academic intervention services during the school day as this is built into the program. All services are provided during the day for all at-risk students. Students who require health services during an afterschool or Saturday program receive services as required. small group and one on one support instruction in the Science classrooms. Students use supplemental materials to enhance writing skills, build academic vocabulary and critical analysis of informational text. Computer assisted programs such as BrainPop,Flocabulary, Gizmo,and Boardworks support instruction in the Social Studies classrooms. Students who are found to be at-risk of failing due to overage, poor performance on formal assessments and classwork, homework and projects as well as students who are not meeting the goals of their IEP and the diagnostic assessment taken in September. Guidance Counselor Intervention small group, one on one School Psychologist Social Worker Health Services Group and Individual Counseling, Needs Based: 1. Students not meeting promotional / performance standards. 2. Students experiencing behavioral / emotional / family Issues negatively Impacting on learning. 3. Students who are multiple holdovers. 4. Individual counseling. 5. Provides staff development for staff. 6. Provides referrals for agencies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  7. Makes contact with various sites for parents. 8. Provides referrals for parents. 9. Liaison between school and parents. Two full time public health nurses on site. 10. Regional Nursing Director- coordinates services throughout region. 11. Full time Supervising Nurse for each district- monitors Services. 12. Monitor Health needs of all students. 13. Provide First Aid 14. SAPIS Coordinator on-site 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 93 students students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year, each guidance counselor will review the SITH print out, meet with the students to ensure their information is accurate, If not, the students will bring proof of address, parents will also be contacted. Meet with these students on a monthly basis to provide guidance and support. Attend workshops and webinars to be up today with new information. SITH students will receive books, pens, pencils, book bags, uniforms, calculators, and other educational supplies. these will be replenished as needed. (stationary, personal items, clothing) They will also receive support for graduation and similar activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers in all areas. 2. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and new teachers 3. School Mentoring Plan identifies mentors, mentees and activities to support professional development towards retention. 4. The pupil personnel secretary and administration will work closely with the Borough Support Center-HR point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. School Professional Development committee meets regularly to discuss and collaborate on professional learning activities for staff 2. Teachers and paraprofessionals receive professional development during team meetings and professional development activities regularly conducted by the Assistant Principals, Principals, literacy and math coaches. 3. Teacher Development Coach provides professional learning cycles to at-risk and non-tenured teachers 4. Content specific professional development is scheduled by the Borough Field Support Center for teachers and paraprofessionals 5. Teachers receive implementation support from contracted vendor for newly purchased programs 6. ESL teachers receive support in effective ESL strategies by attending DOE OELL and Borough Field Support professional learning offerings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  7. Principal and Assistant Principals attend scheduled Citywide and professional development 8. Principal and Assistant Principals receive scheduled professional development through the District Talent Coach Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process followed Chancellor’s guidelines: 1. Principal designated 5 staff members and the UFT designated staff members to form a team 2. After receiving professional development, Principal conducted training session on the purpose, protocols and responsibility of the team 3. Team members met to examine and decide options for the staff 4. Team members presented selection of appropriate assessment measures to the staff during a professional development Monday in September 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 964, 767.00 N/A N/A N/A 40,142.00 0 11,948,706.00 x N/A N/A N/A x N/A x Section Reference(s) Section 4 and 5 N/A N/A N/A Section 4 and 5 N/A Section 4 and 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Elizabeth Blackwell Middle School in compliance with Section 1118 of Title I and ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Elizabeth Blackwell Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Elizabeth Blackwell Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I and ESSA in implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Elizabeth Blackwell This school is (check one): DBN: 27Q210 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We offer two supplemental programs that are after school tutorials. One program is broken down by grade (6,7,8). Three classses exist that are made up of test-takers in grade 6, test takers in Grade 7 and test takers in grade 8. One class will be non-test takers. Each class will have approximately 20-25 students. There will be 4 teachers; ELA, ENL, Foreign language. In classes where students are not exempt, the teacher will focus on reading comprehension and test-taking strategies in both Math and ELA. The teacher also will focus on building academic language. In the class of exempt ENL students, the focus will be on language development using various online programs geared towards ENL students. Teacher will also focus on English converstational skills. Instruction in all three classes is driven by data such as reading assessments and performance tasks. Instruction focuses on needs of students, specifically student language needs and needs of immigrant students not on grade level. All students have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries that are used throughout content area classes and afterschool classes to build vocabualry. Also used are Spanish language textbooks in Science, Social Studies, and Math. Additionally, classroom instruction will focus on critical thinking skills, citing textual evidence and claim / counterclaim because these strategies are difficult for students to learn due to language barrier. This program will begin on Thursday October 25, 2018 and will continue through June 6, 2019. The program will be held on Thursday afternoon from 2:45 until 5:00 pm. During the spring semester, a Saturday instructional program will be conducted for the 8th grade ELL and immigrant students. The instructional focus for this program is to prepare our ELL students for the upcoming NYS intermediate science exam. This program concentrates on the Performance Test of the state exam (which consists of tasks at three stations) and the written test part of the state exam (which consists of multiple-choice and open-ended questions). All classes are conducted in English. Students receive word-for -word glossaries. Glossaries are available in Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Chinese and Urdu. This program will begin on approximately April 27, 2019 and will run until the week before the exam in June. Approximately 60 students will attend. There will be 2 ENL teachers and 1 Science teacher for this program. Teachers will be paid per session from the Title III immigrants funds. Materials will be purchased using Title III immigrand funds. This will include technology and books. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We have a large ENL population. Professional learning opportunites that take place on Monday afternoon will target teachers of immigrant students and support staff with best practices methodology. Teachers of these students will meet duirng common planning time to share best practices. During teacher team meetings, strategies will be discussed and incorporated into our curriculum maps. Along with sharing of best practices, teachers will focus on lesson planning,curriculum planning and revision, data analysis, and analyzing student work. The Professional Development plan for immigranst students consists of Differentiated Instruction in all content areas but more specifically ELA and Math, and 8th grade Science. All 7th grade classes, including those of students of ENL will be provided with college and career readiness activities. We have purchased a contract with" I Will Graduate" to provide instruction to students and staff. Staff members from "I will Graduate" will also provide professional development to teachers on how to use the smartboard to enhance instruction, Symptoms and Signs of Child Abuse and examination of students social and academic strenghts and weaknesses. Training to meet the needs of immigrant students is provided by the Borough Field Support Center and DELLSS. Training focuses on areas such as: Supporting immigrant students in the content area classroom, academic language and differentiated instruction. In addition, staff attends meetings offered by the Borough Field Support Centers and the NYCDOE central office to address the needs of immigrant students. The agendas, sign in sheets and reflection sheets are kept on file with Dr. Victoria Somma, Assistant Principal, for those who attend outside workshops. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are offered the opportunity to learn about instructional strategies, NYS assessments given to their students, school safety, and high schools. In addition, parents will be offered a series of workshops on how to use the computer and computer systems. This is done through: 1. Parent workshops conducted at least 4 times during the school year. Opportunities for parents to attend during the day and evening will be offered to meet the needs of working parents. 2. Scheduling of parent / teacher conferences twice during the school year (November and March). 3. Conducting Fall and Spring open houses for parents (Sept. and May) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 4. Scheduling parent workshops on accessing language resources from Pupil Path (on line grade book). 5. Providing progress reports through pupil path 6. School announcements 7. Notices sent home in dual language or with a message to have the notice translated. 8. School messenger 9. Title I / PTA meetings. In addition, translation and Interpretations services are provided for parents / guardians. We have staff members that read, write and speak Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Albanian, and Russian. If they cannot provide translation services, the Translation Unit is contacted. We also secure the translation services from a DOE vendor "Big Word Translation Services." All ENL students and immigrant students are informed of all extra-curricular activities via a notice backpacked, school messanger, school website, parent teacher conferences and parent engagement Tuesdays. Activities offered are after school tutorial programs, CHAMPS, Beacon Program, school dances, college trips (7th graders) and PBIS activities. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Elizabeth Blackwell Borough Queens School Number 210 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Bonnie Butcher Coach Elizabeth Eaton ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elena Beissel Teacher/Subject Area Ana Cabrera/Common Branch, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms Burnett/ ELA Related-Service Provider Della Furiano Superintendent Assistant Principal Mrs. Victoria Somma Coach Marta Kargol School Counselor Monique Hodge Parent Jasoda Ramnarine Parent Coordinator Leonor Rosa Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 6 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1901 Total number of ELLs 360 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school’s current assessments for the ELLs include Teacher College Reading Assessments, iReady in English Language Arts and Math, and the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP). These assessments are given throughout the school year to show growth in the reading and math levels. The Teachers College Reading Assessments and the DRPs are both given three times throughout the school year, Fall, Winter, and Spring. The results are correlated to determine reading levels on the Lexile and Fountas and Pinnell levels. The iReady Diagnostic in ELA and Math are given in the Fall and new entering students are given 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  the assessment upon arrival throughout the school year. The assessment results are provided in levels, equivalent to grade level common core standards. Science afterschool. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support teachers in using the assessment data to guide instructional planning, teachers are provided time during Common Planning throughout the week. During this time, ENL and monolingual teachers work together to review assessment data and adjust lessons to support the ENL students. Teachers also receive professional development from model teachers in identifying skills and tasks appropriate in supporting ENL students based on the data. ENL teachers gave professional development to monolingual teachers of ENL students upon request from teachers for assistance with strategies to meet the needs of these students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To identify baseline and areas of need, various assessments are used. At the beginning of the school year, teachers analyze the results of the NYS English Language Arts, NYS Math, and NYSESLAT. Teachers also administer the DRP baseline assessment in the Fall and identify correlations to the state assessment, if any. These along with the ST Math and Reading Plus Program also provide teachers with ongoing benchmark results to monitor progress in various areas of need individual to each student. Previously administered NYS 8th grade Science Assessment was used for Saturday Science Enrichment program for ENL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is collected and analyzed, ENL teachers and monolingual teachers provide academic interventions during the English Language Arts Enrichment class periods once a week. ENL teachers also provide academic interventions during the ENL Integrated class periods in the English Language Arts or Content Subject class period. The teachers also provide students with tools to help them complete classroom tasks and assignments. For example, ENL teachers provide ENL students with graphic organizers or checklists to complete an extended written response or essay. ENL students were also give the opportunity to attend an after school program on Thursdays as academic intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data to guide instruction by providing Academic Intervention Services for struggling students. We provide professional development to all staff members that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. Teachers provide small group instruction or one on one conferencing during lunch tutorials and during the afterschool title III program. Additionally they use high-quality research-based instruction that is differentiated for ELLs. Teachers also maximize student potential by sharing insights into the student’s home life, family background, and interests that affect decision-making 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT 6 7 8 TOTAL Entering (Beginning) 30 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  20 32 82 Emerging (Low Intermediate) 19 12 14 45 Transitioning (High Intermediate) 18 18 23 59 Expanding (Advanced) 33 34 45 112 Commanding (Proficient) 39 31 24 94 Total 139 115 138 392 NYS ELA Grade Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Total 6 37 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2 0 0 39 7 44 4 0 0 48 8 51 4 0 0 55 NYSAA 0 0 6 0 6 NYS Math Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Total Grade English HL English HL English HL English HL 6 30 0 23 0 7 0 2 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  0 62 7 35 13 10 3 0 0 0 0 61 8 38 19 10 4 2 1 0 0 74 NYSAA 0 0 0 0 4 0 2 0 6 NYS Science Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Total English HL English HL English HL English HL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  8 48 0 11 1 0 0 0 0 60 NYSAA Bilingual (SWD) 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 NYSESLAT data results show that 26% of our ENL population are Entering level, 15% are at Emerging level, 19% are at Transitioning level and 36% are at Expanding level. The last two years we have had 30% of our ENL students that tested at Commanding levels. From the total current ENL students that took the NYS English Language Arts test (142 students), 93% of these students scored at a Level 1, and 7% scored at a Level 2. None of our ENL students that took the NYS ELA test achieved a Level 3 or Level 4. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? To disseminate these findings and adjust school programs or curriculum, Administration, ENL teachers, monolingual teachers and Model Teachers use the Common Planning Periods, Professional Development tim, and Other Professional Planning Times to collaborate on making these changes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school currently only offers Freestanding ENL programs in grades 6-8. ENL students are programmed as block scheduling and heterogeneously. Entering and Emerging students receive four class periods of Stand Alone ENL services by an ENL teacher and four class periods of Integrated ENL services in the English Language Arts class. The Transitioning and Expanding ENL students receive four class periods of Integrated ENL services in either English Language Arts, Science or Math classes by an ENL teacher. Our Commanding ENL students receive ENL services during 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  two class periods either in the English Language Arts, Math or Science class period by an ENL teacher. Services are provided as outlined per the CR Part 154.2 guidelines. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once student levels are identified either by NYSESLAT scores or NYSITELL scores, students are scheduled on STARS. Entering and Emerging students are provided with four- 47-minute class periods of Integrated services in the ELA class by an ENL teacher, and four- 47 minute periods of Stand-Alone services by an ENL teacher. Transitioning and Expanding students are provided with two- 47-minute class periods of Integrated services in the ELA class by an ENL teacher, and two- 47 minute periods of Integrated services in the Science class by an ENL teachers. Our Commanding students are provided with two- 47 minute periods in either ELA, Science or Math class by an ENL teacher. The RLAT is reviewed on a continuous basis to ensure that all students are receiving their mandated services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the core content classrooms with ENL students, all students receive content in English. ENL students are provided with materials in their language or a content specific content glossary and bilingual dictionary for support. Students who are Spanish native speakers are provided with math and science textbooks and materials in Spanish. Monolingual teachers of Entering and Emergent ENL students have labeled classroom furniture and supplies with their English names to help ENL students identify these items. New students are paired with another student who speaks their home language whenever possible. ENL teachers provide students in the core content areas with specific and reachable learning objectives, and make connections between content and background knowledge. The teachers also use videos, visual and kinesthetic aids, cooperative learning groups and direct teaching of vocabulary. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL students are evaluated in their home languages throughout the school year by providing them translated editions of assessments or oral translators. Classroom assessments in Math, Science, or Social Studies are given the opportunity to complete assessments in their Native language. Teachers and staff members that are fluent in Spanish, Bengali, or Urdu provide teachers with translations of student answers. During state assessments, the school’s testing coordinator provides proctors with student testing accommodations to ensure students receive appropriate assessment accommodations. These accommodations include translated editions, word for word glossaries, or oral translators permitted by funding. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: SIFE students are given enrichment one time a week. In addition, teachers differentiate the materials to meet the needs of the student. This includes activation of prior knowledge, print rich environment and hands-on learning activities. b. Newcomer: Specific resource materials called “Newcomers” was purchased for ENL teachers to use with these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  students. Monolingual teachers were given iPads to use with the students to assist them in the content areas. Instructional strategies include teaching survival language, vocabulary enrichment activities, sentence frames and sentence starters. c. Developing: With Developing students, ENL teachers use various strategies during instruction. These strategies include making connections when reading, visualizing, shared writing, personal journals and narrative writing. Instructional material was purchased for use by the ENL teachers. d. Long-Term: Instruction is differentiated for our Long-term ENL students. These strategies include prewriting activities, teaching of complex structures in writing, and abstract academic concepts. e. Former ELLs: Differentiated instruction is also provided to our Former ENL students. These students are provided glossaries for content area subjects as reference. Other strategies include, small group strategic reading, making predictions and inferences, and expanded academic language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL of SWD use audio books to provide the students with access to academic content. Teachers use many visuals and graphic organizers to assist these students. Vocabulary development is embedded into their lessons. Other instructional strategies include scaffolding, drawing on prior knowledge of students, filling in the gaps in background knowledge, reviewing of previously learned concepts and making connections to new ones. Furthermore, ENL teachers also provide ENL-SWDs English language development strategies including introduction of conceptual framework, word webs, flash cards match-up, vocabulary foldables, and personal student created dictionaries. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are placed in the least restrictive environment (LRE) whenever possible. Students are exposed to the grade level curriculum with modifications. Teachers utilize google translate to assist the students in understanding the material. Their modifications, management needs and goals are taken into consideration when planning the lessons. Goals for the IEP are created around the skills necessary to access the general education curriculum. Some strategies that are used with ENL-SWDs include station teaching, peer tutoring to reinforce what they know, storytelling and use of role playing with dialogue. Professional development has been given to the teachers of SWD to ensure that there is alignment between the PLOP, recommended services and goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs at MS 210 for ELLs are designed to enhance ELLs academic vocabulary in all content areas. There is targeted intervention for ELLs in ELA /Math and other content areas : Peer to Peer Intervention (All Content Areas), Advisory, Tittle III afterschool AIS program (ELA Math), Saturday Academy (Science Prep) and Title I afterschool AIS program. The courses are supported by ESL Certified Teacher and Content Area teachers. Intervention is individualized and based on student data. Vocabulary is taught together with content area using direct instruction, information from context, morphology, knowledge about multiple meanings and from cognates to infer word meaning. Destination Math is utilized to help ELL's to develop basic math skills and Destination Reading and Destination Math are used to supplement the ELA Curriculum. Intervention programs used include iReady for ELA and Math, ST Math to help better serve our ENL in ELA and math. The 8th grade ELL classes are scheduled for six periods in Science as opposed to five. The additional period is built into the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  teacher's and classes schedule as a double period. During this double period block, ELL students participate in inquiry based science labs in preparation for the NYS intermediate Science exam. During the spring semester an ELL Saturday instructional program is conducted for the 8th grade ELL students. The instructional focus for this program is to prepare our ELL students for the upcoming NYS intermediate science exam. This program concentrates on the Performance Test of the state exam (which consists of tasks at three stations) and the written test part of the state exam (which consists of multiple-choice and open-ended questions). All classes are conducted in English, students receive word-for-word glossaries. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After analyzing the school data, we identified a need for additional academic support for our 8th grade ENL students in Science. Our ENL teachers provide integrated services to our Transitioning, Expanding and/or Commanding 8th grade students in the Science classroom as permitted by the CR Part 154.2 guidelines. In addition, small group AIS will be utilized to assist students who are struggling in reading. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL students are provided with Title III programs in Science afterschool. ENL students are also provided with translated notices in their home language of afterschool programs, extracurricular activities to promote participation. Every child at MS 210 and that includes all ELL students, are informed of all extra-curricular activities via a notice backpacked, School Messenger, school website, PTA meetings, Parent Teacher conferences, and Back to School night. Activities offered are extended day, after school, CHAMPS, physical education programs, student council, and Beacon. Additionally, ELLs are programmed for in school curricular activitie, such as PBIS activities and Movie Night. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Beginner ENL classes were issued iPads to use with the students to assist in having them access additional instructional material, to conduct research and to translate materials. Instructional materials used to support ENLs include “Newcomers,” “Side by Side,” Duolingo (technology based), picture dictionaries in home language and English, Photo Library, flash cards, and Google Translate (technology based). Whenever possible, text books are purchased in Spanish, our largest subgroup population’s Native Language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL students’ home language is assessed and supported in various ways. First, our Spanish Native speakers that are newly incoming are assessed using the Spanish LAB-R. The assessment results from the Spanish LAB-R identify students that have academic knowledge in their home language. ENL teachers also have students become aware of the relationship between the home language and the acquired language, simplifying vocabulary, speaking clearly and slowly, supporting academic language development with rich print and visuals, and creating a multicultural environment in the classroom free of judgment. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL teachers attend the same professional development sessions as the general-monolingual education teachers. They are active participants in common planning with the monolingual teachers and special education teachers. Resources, such as supplementary books, suggested by the ENL teachers are ordered by the administration to assist the students. Time for ENL teachers to use iPads for Use of monitoring Dualingo 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students are initially assessed using NYSITELL upon entering. As per the NYSITELL score, student is placed in appropriate level ENL classes and program as per outlined CR Part 154.2 guidelines. ENL teachers provide instruction in target language and offer support via resources, such as textbooks, dictionaries in home and target languages, use of technology, visuals, removing difficulties with vocabulary, modeling, repetition, and use of real concrete objects. ENL teachers also use the strategy called Total Physical Response (TPR), where students physically respond to a statement or question using hand gestures or body movements (for example, Simon Says). ENL students are offered an afterschool enrichment program provided by ENL teachers and administrative staff. In addition, ENL students are also provided the opportunity to attend an enrichment program during the summer to continue target language development. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ENL students are offered classes in Spanish to meet Checkpoint A as per the NYS Other Languages guidelines. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development days target ESL teachers and ELL support staff with best practices methodology. ESL teachers,content area teachers of ELs and Assistant Principals attend workshops on ESL strategies and methodologies. Professional Development days target ESL teachers and ELL support staff with best practices methodology. ESL teachers,content area teachers of ELLs and Assistant Principals attend workshops on ESL strategies and methodologies. The Professional Development Plan for all ELL personnel consists of Differentiated Instruction for ELLs, Content Area Support for ELA and Math, Common Core and Literacy and Math Tasks for ELLs .2. The staff is provided with weekly departmental meetings and school wide meetings on Common Core and College Readiness, RTI and Interdisciplinary literacy. 3.The school admnistration also provides workshops in the following areas: Social Dynamics of the Whole Child, Creation of SMART Goals for Students, Symptoms and Signs of Child Abuse, Examination of Students Social and Academic Strengths and Weaknesses. 4. ELL Training will be provided by the Bourough Support Center and provide DELLSS Trainings in the following areas:: Supporting ELLs in the Content Area Classroom, Academic Language for ELLs, and Diffrentiated Instuction for ELLs. ENL teachers are provided with the same professional development as the general education teachers. The Professional Development included assessment strategies, writing appropriate unit and lesson plans, questioning and discussion 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  strategies. Teachers are assigned professional development on a rotation so that they can attend all content area specific professional development opportunities offered. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For all professional development sessions, an agenda is created and filed. In addition, attendance sheets are handed out during the sessions for documentation of teacher attendance. All materials given to the teachers are attached to the agendas. Professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 are provided through opportunities that included, the ENL process/policies, Co-Teaching an ENL class, Strategies for the Monolingual Teacher, Testing Procedures/Policy/Accommodations for all Students, including the ENL population, Preparing for NYSESLAT Test Administration, and NYSESLAT Scoring. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. 1. Parents are afforded opportunities to learn about Common Core, NYS-ESL standards, instructional strategies and NYS assessments given to their children through: 1. Conducting parent awareness workshops 2. Scheduling of parent/teacher conferences twice during the school year 3. Conducting fall and spring open houses for parents. 4. Scheduling parent workshops on accessing ARIS Parent Link, Pupil Path (online gradebook) 5. Providing progress reports through Pupil Path 6. School announcement board posts The initial identification process is as follows: Translation and Interpretation services are provided for parents/guardians. We have staff in our school that read, write and speak Spanish and Bengali, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian and are availabe for translation. If they cannot provide translation services the Translation Unit is contacted. Also, in the event that they are not available during Parent Teacher's conferences and other parent meetings we secure translation services from a DOE vendor. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator and bilingual Guidance Counselor conduct parent workshops on a regular basis, allowing parents to learn about pupil path, the high school application process, school programs and items of concerns. Our school messenger system translates messages for our parents. During monthly PTA meetings, there is translation services. School website also translates in more than 10 languages. Translation and Interpretation services are provided for parents/guardians. We have staff in our school that read, write and speak Spanish and Bengali, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian and are availabe for translation. If they cannot provide translation services the Translation Unit is contacted. Also, in the event that they are not available during Parent Teacher's conferences and other parent meetings we secure translation services from a DOE vendor. There is a yearly greet the teacher meeting and the following workshops/meetings: Content Area/Curriculum Meetings, Student Expectations, Course Offerrings and School Leadership Team Meetings open to all parents and teachers in the school community. Parent Teacher Conferences and Principal's Address are on a monthly basis. The Cross Island YMCA Beacon is the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Community Based Organization which is housed at MS210. It provides Defensive Driving, Health and Physical Fitness (Aerobi Classes), CPR Training, Entrepreunership and Financial Literacy for the parents. The needs of the parents are evaluated through the use of PTA surveys and the Environmental Survey by the DOE and parental suggestions. Internet bullying workshops, parenting workshops, PotLuck, Movie night, Summer Reading Challenge, Student of the Month are also additional activities that are used to encourage parents to be actively involved. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Bonnie Butcher, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Elizabeth Blackwell School DBN: MS 210 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Bonnie Butcher Title Principal Mrs. Victoria Somma Assistant Principal Ms. Rose Flores Parent Coordinator Mrs. E. Biessel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Poppi Tepalidis Parent Ms. Ana Cabrera Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Oumarou Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Angela Forte Ms. Karaline McQuade Coach Coach Ms. Haydee Pistone School Counselor Ms. Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 1/1/01 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 7/21/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: MS210 Superintendent: Mary Barton DBN: 27Q210 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Gizel Urena NA NA NA NA NA NA conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator NA NA NA yES NA NA NA YeS NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Middle School 210 has a very culturally and language speaking diversified parent population. We currently have a student population of 1,900. For these 1,900 students, as per the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) from ATS the following data stated is for parents’ preferred Spoken language, we have 44% of our parents that prefer English, 37% prefer Spanish, 14% prefer Bengali, 1% prefer Arabic, 1% prefer Chinese, and other languages that represent less than 1% include, Afrikaans, Albanian, Fukie, Burmese, Cantonese, French, Haitian-Creole, Hindi, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Mandarin, Nepali, Pashto, Pilipino, Portuguese, Punjabi, Sinhalese, Turkish, Urdu, Uzbek, and Vietnamese. As per the RAPL report from ATS, the following data stated is for the parents’ preferred Written language, 45% of our parents prefer English, 36% prefer in Spanish, 14% in Bengali, 1% in Arabic, 1% in Chinese, and other languages that represent less than 1% include, Afrikaans, Albanian, Burmese, French, Haitian-Creole, Hindi, Nepali, Pashto, Pilipino, Portuguese, Punjabi, Sinhalese, Turkish, Urdu, Uzbek, and Vietnamese. This data is information that was stated by the parents/guardians on the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Yearly we update parental preferences as stated on the Student Emergency Contact Cards or if parents verbally express a change in preference to school staff. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Bengali Arabic Chinese 689 259 26 27 36% 14% 1% 1% 706 266 25 19 37% 14% 1% 1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Newsletters- Monthly Monthly Calendars- Quarterly After school information-as needed Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In School Translation by Staff in Spanish & Bengali For non-covered language we will use the DOE Vendor "The Big Word" 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  New York State testing dates-as needed April - June Graduation Information Sept – June Parent Teacher Conferences Nov, Feb, May In School Translation by Staff in Spanish & Bengali For non-covered language we will use the DOE Vendor "The Big Word" In School Translation by Staff in Spanish & Bengali For non-covered language we will use the DOE Vendor "The Big Word" In School Translation by Staff in Spanish & Bengali For non-covered language we will use the DOE Vendor "The Big Word" 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conferences Nov, Feb, May In School Staff and BIG Word Services Open school night Parent engagement-Tuesdays Year Around NA NA NA NA In School Staff and DOE Over-the-Phone NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of an emergency, the school will provide information to parents through School Messenger, which provides spoken information in various languages, use of staff members, and DOE Over-The-Phone Interpretation Services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, professional development will be provided by the Language Access Coordinator after attending training conducted by Field Language Access Coordinator. The professional development includes a PowerPoint, handouts and online access to various documents. These documents include, but are not limited to PowerPoint handouts, DOE Over-the-Phone Interpretation information and phone number, and videos showing service being used. Teachers are also encouraged to fill out a survey through Google Document Form online, providing the LAC with information on languages other than English that they speak, and willingness to interpret for other staff members and translation of school documents. Data collected from this survey is entered onto an Excel document, which is posted in the main office for secretarial and staff members’ reference, and provided to administration. Teachers have access to all information throughout the school year for use. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our limited-English Proficient parents are made aware of their rights to receive information in their native language in various ways. Once parents enter the building, they are welcomed with the DOE poster informing parents that they will receive translation and interpretation services, and when they sign in with the School Safety personnel parents also see the Language Identification Guide posted on the table, the same sign they will see when entering the main office. Next to the school safety desk, there is a standing carousel filled with Informational Booklets in various languages, and the Language Identification Guide brochure. When sending out school notices in English, Spanish, and/or Bengali, at the top we provide parents with notification that if they need the information translated in another language other than the one provided to contact or visit the school. Also during Parent Teacher Conferences, staff members make announcements in Spanish and Bengali. During PTA sponsored meetings, the Parent Coordinator, whom speaks Spanish also provides information in Spanish to the parents. The school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations in the following ways: • Sending home NYC Department of Education letters in the student’s native language • Providing oral translation services in person and by 3-way conference calls, when necessary Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Throughout the school year, the Language Access Coordinator uses the RAPL report from ATS to make sure parents whose preferred Written language other than English are provided with the correct notices. The Language Access Coordinator also updates the RAPL report once new incoming students are enrolled to the school. Through the parent survey and conferences the school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availabilty. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82 
