2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q211 School Name: ELM TREE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: KRISTEN NIVEN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 211: Elm Tree Elementary School School Number (DBN): 24Q211 BEDS Code: 342400010211 Grades Served: K,1,2,3, 4 50-51 98th Street Corona NY 11368 School Address: Phone Number: 929-208-4860 Fax: 292-208-4862 School Contact Person: Kristen Niven Email Address: KNiven@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kristen Niven Charles Hauber Maria Perez Kristen Niven Cindy Huesca N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent: Madelene Chan Superintendent’s Office Address: 50-51 98th Street Corona, NY 11368 Superintendent’s Email Address: Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-592-3357 Fax: 718-592-3770 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: 94QFSN Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY Executive Director’s Email Address: LPender@schools.nyc.govP Phone Number: 718-828-5488 Fax: 718-391-8320 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristen Niven Charles Hauber Maria Dejesus Perez Trudy Pierrepont Cindy Huesca N/A N/A N/A Julissa Nicasio Urena Belem Fragaso Jose Morales Guadalupe Tecaupacho Nicole Fulgoni *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Guidance Counselor Parent Parent Parent Parent UFT 2018-19 CEP 4  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Elm Tree Elementary School is committed to providing our students with learning experiences that will ensure success today, and also provide long lasting successful outcomes in the future. Hands-on learning experiences in cooperative groups, the social and emotional approach of Responsive Classroom, technology training for the 21 st century and the 2018-19 CEP 8  opportunity to become bilingual, biliterate and bicultural will all provide long lasting outcomes which will impact our students’ futures. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Elm Tree Elementary School began as a new school in the 2013-2014 school year. In our 2018-2019 senior year, we will serve students from Pre-K-5th grade. We currently have 299 students on register with 49% of our student population classified as ELLs and 97% of our student population qualify for free or reduced lunch. We are a primarily Spanish Dual Language school and we follow a 50-50 framework. Our classes are grouped into "team classes" which sit side-by-side. In addition, one class on each grade (K-5) is also a DL ICT class, providing our special needs students with the opportunity to engage in Dual Language instruction as well. We continue to partner with organizations that can support our home-school connection and build upon our “Parents as Teachers” initiative. This year we continued to partner with Cool Culture to provide all of our Kindergarten families with the opportunity to visit zoos, museums and gardens throughout the city free of charge. Cool Culture provides our parents with opportunities to provide their children with learning experiences that they otherwise would not have been able to afford. Cool Culture allows our parents to include the whole family, supporting meaningful, fun filled activities for our students. CookShop and CookShop for Families continues to play an important role at Elm Tree Elementary School. CookShop provides our students with the opportunity to learn healthy eating habits at a young age through discovery and cooking. Cookshop for Families provides our parents with the opportunity to learn healthy eating habits and cooking suggestions. Participating parents receive free groceries at each workshop to foster “Parents as Teachers” while cooking a healthy meal for the whole family with their child! The biggest challenge for both Elm Tree and our parent community is overcoming our overflow school status and transitioning into a zone school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student populations would include our 12:1:1 classes. Their special needs would include speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy and autism. 2018-19 CEP 9  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review evidenced Well Developed in the following areas: 1.4 Maintain a Culture of Mutual Trust and Positive Attitudes and 3.4 Establish a Culture for Learning that Communicates High Expectations. Findings evidenced, "School leaders consistently communicate high expectations and provided training to the entire staff. School leaders and staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college career readiness for all constituents. The impact of this work has enabled a culture of mutual accountability that exists around observational feedback. Our 2017-2018 Quality Review identified our key area of focus as 1.2 -Pedagogy. Findings evidenced, “Continue to refine teaching practices aligned to your articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best.” 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q211 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 298 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 90.3% % Reduced Lunch 49.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 93.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.92 0% 50% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 19 18 10 94.1% 5.7% 20.5% 1.3% 2.7% 0.7% 2 0% 5.7 30.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Assessment: Fountas and Pinnell data collected in May, 2018 evidenced 77% of ELL students moved 3 or more instructional reading levels and 50% of Special Education students moved 3 or more instructional reading levels. Furthermore, teacher surveys conducted during the 2017-2018 school year along with Summative End of Year Conferences for 2018 identified 100% of classroom teachers requested the expansion of professional development in the areas of guided reading progress monitoring, writing and effective running records, which they feel would better enable them to appropriately assess and differentiate students' instructional needs. Strengths:  Organized Dual Language reading and math program with English and Spanish components that complement each other Sufficient guided reading materials Fountas and Pinnell leveled literacy Intervention Program  Organized Guided Reading Program  Organized Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment program   Adequate technology to support visual learners with remedial reading programs  Collaborative teachers who plan effectively   ELL Coordinator  RTI Coordinator  RTI Teacher  After School Program   Estrellita Phonics Program implemented by trained teachers  Fundations Phonics Program implemented by trained teachers Saturday Program 2018-19 CEP 12  Needs:  Continuation of Professional Development on the topics of Guided Reading, Shared Reading and Progress Monitoring for teachers Initiation of Guided Reading Progress Monitoring Professional Development for teachers Initiation of Running Records Professional Development for teachers    Overview and timeline of topics for Professional Development  New running records template  A timeline for support and sustainability after the professional development series concludes. Priority  Overview and time line of topics for Professional Development  A time line for support and sustainability after the professional development series concludes. This goal, which encompasses rigorous instruction is driven by the need to ensure that all students meet grade level reading expectations each year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By June 2019, 80% of all ELL and 80% of SWDs will move a minimum of 3 instructional reading levels. Measurable: Fall administration of Fountas & Pinnell will provide baseline data from which growth is measured. Winter administration of Fountas & Pinnell will provide benchmark data from which progress will be monitored. Spring administration of Fountas & Pinnell will provide summative data from which growth will be measured. Achievable: A Professional Development Series for teachers to improve reading instruction will be ongoing throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The series will include topics on Guided Reading, Progress Monitoring, Running Records, Close Reading, Independent Reading and Fundations. Observation feedback sessions focusing on the Danielson Teaching Rubric will assist all teachers in moving forward in their ability to conduct effective reading lessons. Relevant: 2016-2017 Fountas & Pinnell data evidenced ELLs and SWDs did not make adequate progress in reading.. Time-bound: The timeline for this goal will begin in September and culminate in June. Benchmark data will be collected in January to provide a needs assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Elm Tree’s school schedule will be formatted to provide 90 minute literacy blocks which incorporate Guided Reading. These 90 minute blocks will be staggered for specific grades/teachers to also allow for push-in assistance from coaches and an RTI teacher. A 14 week professional development cycle will be implemented during October, November, December and January. This cycle will focus on incorporating best practices for collecting running records and progress monitoring during guided reading, Professional development will also focus on identifying strategies for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Classroom Teachers Students Coaches Classroom Teachers Students 09/18 School Administrators Coaches 9/18 - 12/18 Coaches, Administrators Classroom Teachers Students Beginning in September and lasting all year Coaches, Administrators Technology Coordinator Students and Parents Beginning in September and lasting all year Teachers School Administrators Coaches Lexia technology program will provide differentiated reading instruction during centers, afterschool programs, Saturday Academy and at home. Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be supported with visually engaging technology and customized instruction which meets individual needs. Each student will receive a bookbag and independent leveled books that will travel between school and home to promote “Parents as Literacy Partners” throughout the year. In addition, each parent will receive access codes for Lexia technology programs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  Families will be engaged by submitting a needs assessment that will provide the school with areas of interest in how to best support their child/children at home. The School Staff will use the results to create a professional workshop plan for families to equip them with the tools and strategies they need to support their child/children at home. The assessment will take place in September 2018 and reassessed in January of 2019. Key personnel that will be involved in collecting the data, providing the training would include parent coordinator, teachers, and additional administrative ancillary staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule Adjustments : RTI Push-In Services 90 Minute Literacy Block 14 Week Schedule of Professional Development Human Resources: Continued funding of Coaches RTI Service Provider Instructional Resources : Purchase of take-home Book Bags for each student Purchase of leveled independent readers for all students to take home Purchase of iRead and continued Lexia licenses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January of 2019 teachers will implement Fountas and Pinnell as a benchmark to determine if students have moved at least one level to identify school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review identified an area of focus to be: "Continue to evaluate the success of assessment strategies across classrooms. Teachers should be able to explain student progress by referring to data trends in all content areas." Strengths: Time available on Tuesdays to allocate for inquiry on a regular basis Literacy coach to provide Fountas & Pinnell data charted by class The scheduling of time on a consistent basis to conduct inquiry Identified a systemic concern around identifying consistency with scoring practices and rubrics Needs: Professional Development modeling how to effectively analyze and evaluate collected displayed data for the purposes of differentiating instruction Strengthening Inquiry Practices across all grade levels Specific inquiry in the areas of reading for ELLs and SWD Facilitators to assist with the effective analysis of data and identification of next steps Timeline of inquiry cycles Timeline for teachers to implement next steps Priority Needs: Professional Development modeling how to effectively analyze and evaluate collected displayed data. This will improve instructional practices for the purposes of differentiating instruction Specific inquiry in improving instructional practices for reading and writing specially for SWD Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By June 2019 teachers will be able to articulate student progress by referring to data trends in all content areas. Measurable: Instructional walk throughs and debriefs will identify strengths, challenges and additional supports needed. 2018-19 CEP 16  Achievable: Tuesday afternoon from 3:00 to 3:35 will be designated as a block of time for all grades to conduct inquiry Relevant: Spring 2018 Fountas & Pinnell data evidenced that only 77% of ELL students and 50% of SWD moved 3 or more independent reading levels Time-bound: October 2018 - May 2019 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Strategies will be identified for ELLs and SWD based on the analyzed data during inquiry Teachers 10/18-5/19 AP Coach Teachers will collaborate and identify data trends through the inquiry process on Tuesday afternoons. Teachers 10/18-5/19 AP Coach Process will be evaluated by administration and teachers to assess the effectiveness of the inquiry process based on students data. Teachers 10/18-5/19 AP Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged by submitting a needs assessment that will provide the school with areas of interest in how to best support their child/children at home. The School Staff will use the results to create a professional workshop plan for families to equip them with the tools and strategies they need to support their child/children at home. The assessment will take place in September 2018 and reassessed in January of 2019. Key personnel that will be involved in collecting the data, providing the training would include parent coordinator, teachers, and additional administrative ancillary staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources  Assistant Principal  Coach  ELL Coordinator  RTI Specialist Instructional Resources Fountas & Pinnell Assessment System Fundations    Estrellita  Guided Reading Books Schedule Adjustments 2018-19 CEP 18   Tuesday afternoon inquiry   Common Planning Inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the month of November teachers will be expected to be able to speak to data trends within their class. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instructional Walkthroughs, Participation during Inquiry Meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on surveys and End of Year Summative conferences, teachers would like to see a scheduled block of time allocated to evaluate assessment and grade wide data. Strengths: Time available on Tuesdays to allocate to inquiry on a regular basis Literacy Coach to provide Fountas & Pinnell data charted by class Teachers collaborate and identify a problem of practice Needs: Professional Development modeling how to effectively analyze and evaluate collected, displayed data for the purposes of differentiating instruction Specific inquiry addressing subgroups Facilitators to assist with the effective analysis of data and identification of next steps Timeline of inquiry topics Timeline for teachers to implement next steps Priority Needs: Professional Development modeling how to effectively analyze and evaluate collected, displayed data for the purposes of differentiating instruction Specific inquiry in the areas of reading for ELLs and SWD This annual goal which encompasses collaboration amongst teachers is driven by the need to ensure that all teachers are collaboratively engaged in inquiry related to the content area of reading for ELLs and SWD to ensure each of these subgroups makes adequate reading progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By January 2019 teachers will have moved through three inquiry cycles identifying needs and next steps related to reading for ELLs and SWD in grades Pre-K through 5th Grade. 2018-19 CEP 20  Measurable: Teachers will engage in inquiry, develop next steps, implement steps and reassess for the purposes of measuring progress Achievable: Tuesday afternoon from 3:00-3:35 will be designated as a block of time for all grades to conduct inquiry Relevant: Spring 2018 Fountas & Pinnell data evidenced that 77% off our ELL population and 50% of our SWD population moved 3 or more independent reading levels. Time-Bound: Inquiry will begin in October 2018 and culminate in May 2019. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development to establish norms and protocols for evaluating and analyzing data effectively Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/18-10/19 Principal Weekly Grade-wide Collaborative Inquiry Teachers will analyze student work to determine gaps in students' understanding Teachers Timeline of next steps to be implemented based on inquiry Teachers will create an action plan to address the gap identified during inquiry Teachers Cycles will continue throughout the year Cycles will continue throughout the year Progress Monitor for effectiveness of implemented strategies Teachers will develop and implement an assessment to determine progress in identified gap and success of strategy implemented Teachers Cycles will continue throughout the year AP Coach ELL Coordinator RTI Specialist Principal AP Coach ELL Coordinator RTI Specialist Principal AP Coach ELL Coordinator RTI Specialist Principal AP Coach ELL Coordinator RTI Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged by submitting a needs assessment that will provide the school with areas of interest in how to best support their child/children at home. The School Staff will use the results to create a professional workshop plan for families to equip them with the tools and strategies they need to support their child/children at home. During Meet the Teacher Night, teachers will review communication methods with parents that include agenda, newletters, ConTxt, and school website. The teachers are available each Tuesday to meet with parents to support their needs as well as their child's. Key personnel that will be involved in collecting the data, providing the communication would include parent coordinator, teachers, and additional administrative ancillary staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources  Coach  ELL Coordinator  Assistant Principal Instructional Resources Fountas & Pinnell Assessment Systems   Teacher Identified Resources as a result of data analysis Schedule Adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal.  Consistent time allotted on Tuesday afternoons X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During January of 2019 we will assess the effectiveness of the inquiry cycles Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inquiry artifacts created during inquiry including student progress monitoring data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Assessment: Teacher surveys conducted during the 2017-2018 along with Summative End of Year Conferences identified 100% of classroom teachers requested the expansion of professional development in the areas of guided reading progress monitoring and effective running records. Strengths: Teaching staff are open to collaboration and professional development for the purposes of improving their practice Teaching staff are open to the use of videotaping and modeling for the purposes of sharing best practices. Support staff including Coaches and Assistant Principal are qualified to implement effective professional development. Classroom teachers have sufficient guided reading materials Classroom teachers have sufficient Fountas & Pinnell assessment materials. Needs: An overview of Professional Development sessions to be conducted. A timeline of professional development on the topic of running records and progress monitoring for the 2018-2019 school year. A timeline for support and sustainability after the professional development series concludes. Guided Reading – Good First Teaching for All Children by Irene C. Fountas & Gay Su Pinnell for all teachers The Continuum of Literacy Learning – Pre-K – 2 by Irene C. Fountas & Gay Su Pinnell for all teachers Priority Needs: An overview of PD sessions to be conducted A time line of professional development on the topic of running records and progress monitoring for the 2018-2019 school year. A time line for support and sustainability when the professional development sessions have ended. This annual goal which encompasses Effective School Leadership and Supportive Environment is driven by the need to ensure that all teachers are able to implement effective guided reading lessons which support students in meeting grade level reading expectations each year. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific -- By January, 2019, 100% of our teachers will demonstrate improvement in collecting relevant data in the form of running records and progress monitoring during guided reading lessons. Measurable -- Baseline data was gathered from Teacher Surveys collected during the 2017-2018 school year as well as Year End Summative teacher conferences. Guided reading observations conducted from November 2017 through May 2018 will provide data by which growth will be measured. Achievable -- A Professional Development Series for teachers to improve guided reading instruction will be ongoing throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Observation feedback sessions focusing on the Danielson Teaching Rubric will provide ongoing benchmarks for teachers' performance to monitor the school's progress in meeting the identified goals. Relevant -- Fountas & Pinnell data evidences a need to focus on improving the reading progress of all ELL students as well as SWD. Time-bound -- The timeline for this goal will begin in September 2018 and culminate in June 2019. Benchmark data will be collected throughout the year for the purposes of progress monitoring. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A 12 week professional development cycle will be implemented during October, November and December of 2017. This cycle will focus on incorporating best practices during guided reading, interpreting data collected during guided reading, and identifying strategies for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Irene Fountas & Gay Su Pinnell, a research based Primary Literacy Professional DVD series on Guided Reading will provide the foundation for our professional development series. This series will focus on Essential Elements of Guided Reading and The . Support and monitoring will continue through June to ensure sustainability. ClassroomTeachers October through December Principal Assistant Principal Coaches Coaches will provide push-in remedial services utilizing strategies that address the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. In addition, this will provide modeling and sharing of best practices for teachers Teachers Students Lexia technology based reading intervention program will provide reading support for students during centers while teachers are engaged with guided reading groups Teachers Students Parents will receive Lexia log-in information as well as workshops demonstrating use of programs All Parents October through June October through June September through November Principal Assistant Principal Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Coaches Technology Coordinator Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Coaches Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged by submitting a needs assessment that will provide the school with areas of interest in how to best support their child/children at home. The School Staff will use the results to create a professional workshop plan for families to equip them with the tools and strategies they need to support their child/children at home. The 2018-19 CEP 26  assessment will take place in September 2018 and reassessed in January of 2019. Key personnel that will be involved in collecting the data, providing the training would include parent coordinator, teachers, and additional administrative ancillary staff and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources ● Funding of Coaches ● Funding of Technology Coordinator Instructional Resources ● Lexia technology based reading intervention program ● Guided Reading – Good First Teaching for All Children by Irene C. Fountas & Gay Su Pinnell for all teachers ● The Continuum of Literacy Learning – Pre-K – 2 by Irene C. Fountas & Gay Su Pinnell for all teachers Schedule Adjustments ● Scheduling of Professional Development sessions ● Scheduling of “Family Fridays” classroom visitations each week ● Scheduling of guided reading blocks for all students ● Scheduling of computer usage for all students ● Scheduling of push-in services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-point benchmark to determine school progress toward meeting the specified goal will be data collected during observations of guided reading lessons during the month of January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data collected from NYSESLAT, and Fountas and Pinnell indicates that our English Language Learners and Special Education students would benefit from a collaborative approach to literacy between home and school. Parent Workshops, Parent-Teacher Conferences, PTA Meetings, and SLT Meetings evidenced that parents have a difficult time supporting their children with literacy at home. Parents expressed difficulty in assisting their children with the acquisition of English. Strengths:  Time scheduled for parent engagement activities on Tuesday afternoons.  Book bags and leveled readers for all students to take home.  Reading Logs to be filled out and signed by parents  Collaboration with parent-coordinator for technology instruction in the parent room   Organizational outlines of daytime activities provided by parent coordinator to support parent schedules. Lexia access from home Needs:  Organizational outline of monthly evening activities to support working parents  Analyzing of usage data to identify students who aren’t using the reading programs at home  Outline for incorporation of technological based programs such as: Lexia  Organizational outline for the incorporation of Literacy Fridays in the classroom to model literacy reading strategies for parents Priority Needs:  Outline for incorporation of technological based programs such as:Lexia  Analyzing of usage data to identify students who aren’t using the reading programs 2018-19 CEP 28 This annual goal for Strong Family and Community Ties is driven by the need to strengthen the Home-School Connection and ensure that parents are comfortable with the important role they play in their child's success in meeting grade level reading expectations each year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By June 2019, 50% of parents will be participating in at least one routine school activity designed to assist them with helping their children succeed in reading. Measurable: The number of opportunities and the number of participants during June, 2018, will provide baseline data. The number of opportunities and the number of participants during January, 2019, will provide benchmark data for the purposes of progress monitoring. The number of opportunities and the number of participants during May, 2019, will provide data from which progress is measured. Achievable: Implementation of " "Family Fridays," Lexia, Take-Home Book Bags, and Daytime and Evening Workshops will increase opportunities for parents to engage with their child's reading curriculum. Relevant: 2017-2018 data revealed less than 12% of parents participate on an ongoing basis Time-bound: The timeline for this goal will begin in September 2018 and culminate in June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Beginning in October 2018, teachers will conduct "Family Fridays" which will highlight the modeling of comprehension questions which can be used at home by parents Parents Teachers Students October through June Administrators Coaches Teachers Parent Coordinator The school will provide access codes to Lexia and Razz Kids for parents home use in assisting their children with reading strategies. Parents Students 09/17-10/17 Administrators Coaches Technology Coordinator Teacher Each student will receive a bookbag and independent leveled readers along with a reading log that will travel between school and home to promote “Parents as Literacy Partners” throughout the year. Parents Students October through June Administrators Coaches Teachers Parent Coordinator Beginning in October 2018 the parent coordinator will offer monthly workshops designed to promote literacy activities at home. Parents PC Every month beginning in October Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources Funding Per Session activities for teachers Instructional resources Materials for Parent Workshops iRead license Schedule adjustment Friday schedule for Family Fridays Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 30  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Sign-In sheets, Reading Logs and Reading Technology Log in data from October through January will identify the percentage of parents participating in each school based learning activity. This data will be used to determine school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-In Sheets, Reading Logs and Technology Log-In Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas & Pinnell ● Letter Recognition ● Word Recognition ● Reading Accuracy and Comprehension Fundations Progress Monitoring NYSITELL ● Listening ● Reading Spanish LAB ● Envisions Pre-assessment  NYC Math Performance Task  Math Exemplars Beginning of the year common core science writing, reading and listening benchmark Beginning of the year common core social studies writing benchmark Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Small Group Push-in and Pull- out ● one-to-one teacher instruction one-to-one computer based instruction Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention ● Phonics and Letter Work ● Guided Reading Fundations ● Drill ● Story time ● Word Play Dictation Envisions Intervention system ● Small Group One-to-one computer based instruction ●During the School Day-After-School  SaturdayAcademy ●During the School Day; After School Saturday Academy  Small Group Whole Group During the Instructional Day Small Group During the Instructional Day After School FOSS ● Guided Exploration ● Personal Reflections ● Application Writing Tasks Readers and Writers Workshop ● Guided Writing ● Interactive Writing Research based writing 2018-19 CEP 32  ● Counselor recommendation Parental Consent At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Counseling ● Character Guidance Lessons on self-esteem, making right choices, expressing themselves ● One-to One Classroom Visits During the school day for 30 minutes 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School Uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment – Recruitment strategies include identifying candidates with both Early Childhood and Common Branch certifications. In addition, the needs of our school place a strong emphasis on candidates who are Spanish bilingual and biliterate. Candidates with Bilingual Extensions and/or TESOL certification are given priority due to our full Dual Language Spanish program and the needs of our students. Retention- Teacher retention is encouraged through creating a collaborative environment which supports the development of teacher pedagogy and the sharing of best practices. Through the common practice of videotaping and teacher modeling of best practices for the purposes of sharing, teachers trust school leaders at their word and understand that moving students forward requires a high level of collaboration and transparency. Assignments – Teacher assignment are chosen based on license and certification requirements, as well as the need to ensure the optimal learning environment for all students. Professional Development Support – Teachers are encouraged to seek outside professional development for the purposes of improving practice and promoting students success, and all requests that encompass the learning objectives and needs of the school are supported. Collaboration is enriched as teachers turnkey all professional development learning to all staff members. In addition, all teachers attend a minimum of one professional development session conducted by the Queens Borough North. Teachers turnkey newly learned information to the rest of the staff during school wide professional development sessions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development at the school level is designed to ensure that all teachers are prepared to help students meet grade level expectations and Common Core State Standards. Professional development includes four series of workshops that provide meaningful blocks of time which allow teachers to discuss and explore new learning strategies for the purposes of improving best practices. Professional development based on the data collected from Advance also determines opportunities for differentiated learning opportunities. Book study selections provide opportunities for teachers to choose topics they would like to explore within the parameters of a collegial book study group Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 36  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Elm Tree Elementary School begins the year by inviting parents to a Kindergarten Orientation to ease the transition from a small preschool setting to a larger elementary setting. During this orientation parents are given an overview of the curriculum as well as the vision and mission of the school. Time is provided for the families to ask questions and learn about the opportunities for family engagement within the school community. The Guidance Counselor is available to offer family and student support, and also recommend community agencies they may find useful. The Parent Coordinator offers language support and conducts a parent survey to identify parent interests for future workshops. Staff members are readily available to assist with securing appropriate bus stops as well as providing information for private busing when requested. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Elm Tree Elementary teachers begin the year by selecting MOSL assessments that will impact to their measure of teacher practice. Based on our table of organization, all teachers have the opportunity to participate on the MOSL team. Before teachers make their selection they review and analyze the previous year’s data within their teacher teams. Once the MOSL selection has been made, teachers continue to review, analyze and make modifications to the curriculum maps that they have outlined for the upcoming year to ensure that they are in alignment with the chosen MOSL. Grade level teams work together to evaluate the authenticity of curriculum resource assessments. Based on their findings, teacher teams work together to create assessments that are authentic, relevant and meaningful. Decisions are made by consensus within the grade level team. Using the results of the assessments, teachers conduct grade level inquiry meetings evaluating and analyzing the results of the assessments. Teachers identify strengths and areas of need and begin to revise instruction in order to address student needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 37  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 166,326.00 0 16,536.00 0 1,797,294.00 X N/A X N/A X 5a, 5b, 5c N/A 5a, 5b, 5c N/A 5a, 5b, 5c 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 38   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Elm Tree Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Elm Tree Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 40  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 41  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 24Q211 Elm Tree Elementary School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Elm Tree Elementary , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Based on our 2017 EDAT data, eighty-five of our students have been identified as at risk students. Fifty-three of those at risk students are ENL students and forty-four of those students are currently in the 2nd, 3rd or 4th grade. The EDAT also identified that 36 of our ENL students have been held over in the past 3 years. In order to support our ENL students in reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, as well as prepare our students for the ELA and Math State Exams, we will offer an After School Program for students in 2nd through 5th grade as well as a Saturday Program for students in 3rd through 5th grade for the following 2018-2019 School year. Since we are a Dual Language School we will also extend our invitation to our after school and Saturday school to our non ELL students. Currently, we have 39 ENL students in 2nd grade, 33 ENL students in 3rd grade, and 10 ENL students in 4th grade. Out of our 39 ENL students in 2nd grade, 28 of them have been identified as at risk level 1. Out of our 33 ENL students in 3rd grade, 11 have been identified as at risk level 1 and out of our 10 ENL students in 4th grade, 5 have been identified as at risk level 1. The subgroups included in this data are: 61 Newcomers 21 Developing year ENLs 29 Former ENLs 25 ENL Students with Disabilities The EDAT data concludes, that our ENL students are in need of extra resources and therefore would benefit from an After School Program as well as a Saturday Program. Our After School Program will begin in November 2018 from 2:30-4:00 on Wednesdays and Thursdays and will culminate in May of 2019. Our Saturday Program will begin in November 2018 from 8:30 - 11:30 and culminate in May 2019. We will also offer a Saturday Program for Parents which will focus on learning math topics as well as offer strategies for helping their children at home. Students participating in our After School Program as well as our Saturday program will be instructed in English with the support of bilingual teachers/TESOL certified teachers, whom can provide home language support as well as ELL strategies. Our After School Program as well as our Saturday program will be organized by our ENL Coordinator Janet Reilly who holds a bilingual extension and a TESOL Advanced Certificate and our Literacy Coach Christina Smith. Janet Reilly and Christina Smith will be responsible for the following: Curriculum Collecting student attendance Notification of the After School Program, Saturday Program and other notifications sent home in the parents preferred language Monitoring student progress Providing professional development to teachers Providing parent workshops for parents of ENL students based on Best Strategies and Practices for ENL students and how to support their children at home. For our After School Program, we anticipate 8 classes for grades 2-5 for approximately 15-20 ENL students in each class. For our Saturday program there will be six classes, where we 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information anticipate 25 students in each grade 3rd through 5th. Bilingual and or TESOL certified teachers will provide instruction and support in English as well as in Spanish. Our After School program and Saturday program will use a combination of resources including Ready NYCCLS for ELA and Math, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Program for reading and writing, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT workbooks for NYSESLAT preparation, and technology programs such as LEXIA (an online benchmark program that differentiates and monitors progress based on student need). Lexia also supports the home-school connection because students can log in from home to build language and reading skills . Participating students will also be provided with resources such as leveled books appropriate to their reading levels, in both languages. The After School Program schedule will be as follows: 2:30-3:00 Lexia (Differentiated Online Program) 3:00- 3:30 Phonics/Reading/Writing Practice/Math Practice 3:30-3:55 NYSESLAT Practice 3:55-4:00 Dismissal The Saturday Program Schedule will be as follows: 9:00-10:30 ELA/Math 10:30 - 11:00 Lexia 11:00 -12:00 Math 12:00 Dismissal All records such as student attendance, portfolio will be kept on file in the school Title III binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our goal is to provide our ENL students with the tools necessary for success on the NYSESLAT as well as on the ELA State Exam and Math State Exam. In order to accomplish this goal, we will provide our teachers with quality training in how to use and apply researched based instructional ELL strategies that will support our ENL students. Teachers selected to instruct the After School Program and our Saturday Academy will receive Professional Development on Monday afternoons from 2:20-3:40 every other Monday which is approximately 14 sessions. The Professional Development Sessions will be facilitated by the Principal Kristen Niven, our Literacy Coach Christina Smith , and our ENL Coordinator Janet Reilly. Professional Development Sessions will be based on previously attended workshops such as: Danielson's Framework for Teaching Analyses of Data and Progress of our Ells: Utilizing our EDAT data Unpacking NYSESLAT: Implications for Ells Reading and Writing Non fiction for Ells Institute: Scaffold for Success 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Fundations Level Specific Workshops Fundations Intervention Workshops Lexia Training Workshops NYSABE Workshops Parent Workshops Future Workshops that will be attended and Turn Keyed: Collaborating to Share Best Practices in Bilingual/Dual Language Classrooms provided by Queens North Borough Queens Support Centers Understanding the ENL Classroom- a Collaborative and Supportive Approach for Administrators provided by Queens North Borough Queens Support Centers Next Generations Standards Records of attendance sheets and Agendas will be maintained by the Principal Kristen Niven. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our goal of engaging parents in our ELL After School Program as well as our Saturday Program is to provide parents with the tools and materials to assist with practice at home. In addition to providing parents with workshops modeling the instructional tasks their children would be engaged in, we wanted to supply our parents with materials they could use at home to reinforce the skills being taught. Each parent will be provided with two workbooks offering simple activities which reinforce both phonics and reading skills. We will also provide math resources. Additionally, we are providing each parent with a Spanish-English picture dictionary to assist with home practice and support in their home language. In addition, parent workshops will be offered 1x each month with a specific focus of helping parents assist their children in the content areas of reading, writing and math. Topics include but are not limited to: Strategies for Learning at Home How to access and use LEXIA from home/Using Technology at home Providing Materials to Support Success Parents Guide to the NYSESLAT/ELA State Exam/Math State Exam Parents Guide to the Next Generation Standards Reading to Children 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Securing a Library Card Using Cool Culture Passes to Build Knowledge Making Time for Conversations at Dinner Turning Meals and Cooking into Reading and Math Practice Parent workshops will be organized by the parent coordinator Jennifer Batista with the support of the ENL provider Janet Reilly. Some workshops will be facilitated by the parent coordinator, ENL Coordinator, or an outside organization. Other workshops will be provided by the teachers as well as support staff. Translations of notifications for workshops as well as translation at the workshops will be provided by Janet Reilly and Jennifer Batista. The Translation and interpretation unit will be utilized if necessary. All records such as agendas, attendance will be kept on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Elm Tree Elementary School Borough Queens School Number 211 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kristen Niven Coach Christina Smith ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nichole Fulgoni Teacher/Subject Area Valentina Moyano/DL SPED Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Isabel Contreras Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Thomas McLaughlin Coach Janet Reilly School Counselor Julissa Nicasio-Urena Parent Maria DeJesus Perez Parent Coordinator Lucy Ferreira Field Support Center Staff Member Ying Ying An Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 3 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 11 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 298 Total number of ELLs 147 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 49.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 4 0 1 1 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? What we use: The first assessment that we use to assess the early literacy skills of our ENL students is the NYSITELL. The NYSITELL provides us with data regarding our ENL students levels of proficiency in the English Language. In addition, for our students whose primary language is Spanish, we use the Spanish LAB as a baseline assessment to assess the students early literacy skills in Spanish. This is particularly important data for ENL students who tested at the beginning level on the NYSITELL, and allows us to triangulate data for our ENL students in order to correctly identify language acquisition needs vs. developmental learning needs. For our 1st through 4th grade ENL students the NYSESLAT performance levels and modalities are analyzed and used to plan instruction . Elm Tree Elementary School also uses Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments to assess our ENL students' early literacy skills in English. Since we are a Dual Language school and the target language is Spanish, we use its 2018-19 CEP 52  Spanish component Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura to assess our students early literacy skills in Spanish. We also use the Estrellita Reading Program as a baseline to assess the early literacy skills of our students in Spanish. In addition, at the end of each writing unit the teachers assess their students wring pieces using a rubric in both languages. Our 2017 NYSITELL determined that 29% of our incoming students scored at "Entering" level, 17% of our students scored at the "Emerging" level, 33% of our students scored at the "Transitioning" level and 21% are scored at the Expanding Level. The 2017 EDAT revealed that 16.7% of our students scored at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT and that 2 of our 3rd graders scored at the expanding level and a 3 or 4 on the ELA State Exam. EDAT data also informed us that 31% of our ENL students advanced 1 proficiency Level, 10% advanced 2 proficiency levels, 1 student advanced 3 proficiency levels, and that 29% remained at the same proficiency level. Additionally, 3% of our ENL students regressed 1 proficiency level and 24.5% of our ENL students have been held over in the past 3 years. Our Fountas and Pinnell assessments provided us with data identifying the early literacy skills (letter recognition, sight words, initial sounds and beginning reading levels) of our ENL students. Data from our Fall administration of Fountas & Pinnell revealed 92% of our kindergarten ENL students scored at an PA, or pre-reading level and that 8% scored at a level A. Implications for Instruction: Collectively this data informed an instructional plan that needed to be equally strong in both English as well as the target language, Spanish, in our Dual Language Program. Our resources need to provide seamless instruction whereby students could begin to build upon content knowledge, prior knowledge and vocabulary in their home language, and use this knowledge to assist with language acquisition each day as they move between instruction in both English and the target language. We will continue to implement the Reading Streets Standards based program along with its Spanish component, Calle de la Lectura. Both of these sets of resources are aligned to provide flawless instruction. Each program also includes a technology component that provides engagement in visual and tactile learning for ENL students. We will also continue to use the Estrellita Reading Program so that our ENL students can build a strong foundation in their Native language as well as continue the use of Fundations to build phonics awareness and early literacy skills in English. The NYSITELL data revealed that 29% of our incoming ENL students are at the Entering level and that 17% are at the Emerging level. Therefore, we will continue to program our literacy period as a 90 minute block that will consist of phonics, guided reading, and reading comprehension along with the additional support of a push in RTI teacher. We will also continue to include a technology piece to our RTI periods. The following programs were purchased: Imagine Learning, which has a Spanish component, RAZ-KIDS, and Smarty Ants that can also be accessed from home. Data from the EDAT revealed that 29% of our students remained at the same proficiency level and that 5 students regressed 1 proficiency level. Also, 24.5% of our ENL students have been held over in the past three years. This data will drive our Afterschool and Saturday School Programs. Fountas & Pinnell data showed that 92% of our entering students are at a pre-reading level and that 8% scored at level A. This data demonstrates that our ENL students must build foundations for their native language as well as the new language to be successful. We will continue to use The Fundations program to build early literacy skills in English and The Estrellita Reading Program to build early literacy in Spanish. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support our ENL students in building a strong foundation of their native language as well as the new language we implement the Reading Streets Program as well as its Spanish component Calle de la Lectura. To build phonological awareness and early literacy skills in English we use the Fundations program. The Estrellita Reading program is used to build these phonological and early literacy skills in Spanish. Guided reading groups are also formed throughout the grades in both languages to promote biliteracy. For math, we use Envisions which is provided in both English and the target language Spanish. We will also provide an After school and Saturday School Program to support our ENL students. 2018-19 CEP 53 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our Dual Language program by analyzing the data provided from the following assessments: NYSESLAT, NYC Math Performance Task, Fountas and Pinnell, Sistema, Fundations, and Estrellita. Through this data collection we evaluate to see if our ENL students are making progress and or areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After analyzing the data from these assessments, the school communicates the data with the staff so that they can create their small groups for literacy and math in the classroom based on the students needs. Additionally, we structure our RTI Literacy program and service the bottom third in each grade by providing an RTI teacher during the literacy period. We will also provide an After school and a Saturday program which will reinforce literacy and math skills for our ENL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school analyzes the data gathered from NYSITELL, the Spanish LAB, NYSESLAT, and Fountas and Pinnell, and uses this data to determine the needs of our ENL students. Students performing in the bottom third are identified based on the students ability to recognize letters, words, and sounds along with their accuracy and comprehension ability. Students in the bottom third in Kindergarten receive extra support through differentiated guided reading lessons within the classroom. Students also receive differentiated instruction for at least 2 hours per week on the iRead computer based program that is tailored to meet the individual needs of the student. Students in 1 st through 4th grade who are identified as performing in the bottom third of their peer group based on the NYSESLAT and Fountas and Pinnell data, also receive RTI instruction. Students are recommended for either Tier I or Tier II support based on data. Tier II students receive RTI push-in services through small group instruction and support with literacy activities provided by an RTI teacher. Students identified as Tier I are pulled for RTI support using the Fundations Program. At the current time, we have 3 RTI teachers which push in for small group RTI instruction, 2 times a week with each group for 50 minutes. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The RLAT report revealed that 46% of our kindergarten students, scored at either the entering or emerging level on the NYSITELL. This data indicates that language supports are needed for our students to acquire the English language. By building a strong base in their native language our students will be able to transfer the language skills necessary to acquire English. As studies have shown that building a strong foundation in your native language allows for strong transference between language skills. Data from the EDAT data showed that 16.7% of our students scored at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT and that 2 of our 3rd graders scored at the expanding level and a 3 or 4 on the ELA State Exam. EDAT data also informed us that 31% of our ENL students advanced 1 proficiency Level, 10% advanced 2 proficiency levels, 1 student advanced 3 proficiency levels, This data proves that students in our dual language program are making progress in English. Although the majority of our students made progress, the EDAT also indicates that 29% of our ENL students remained at the same proficiency level. Additionally, 3% of our ENL students regressed 1 proficiency level and 24.5% of our ENL students have been held over in the past 3 years. This data communicates that we must make these students our focus and provide additional resources and supports for them. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We will disseminate our findings during a designated PD which will include NYSITELL, NYSESLAT,and EDAT data to ensure that the staff can make adjustments necessary for the success of their students. Another PD will be provided which will inform the staff of ELA and Math State Exam results, analysis of this data, and adjustments moving forward. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Elm Tree Elementary School provides a monolingual Special Education 12:1:1 classroom for grades K through 3rd. The ENL students are serviced during their literacy periods using an integrated approach. A TESOL certified teacher provides language acquisition needs and vocabulary support based on the students level of proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Elm Tree Elementary school provides a Dual Language program using the 50/50 collaborative side by side model for grades K through 4. Research shows that students in a dual language program excel and show more progress than in other programs. The target language is Spanish being that most of our ENL population native language is Spanish.The students follow an AB schedule and students in each class are heterogeneous in regards to proficiency levels. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? School programming ensures mandated instructional minutes in both English and the target language. Through our dual language program a majority of our students in K - 4 receive their mandated number of instructional minutes according to proficiency levels. Students in our monolingual Special Education 12:1:1 receive their mandated instructional minutes using an integrated approach in which the ENL teacher collaborates with the SPED teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. Students identified as Entering or Emerging receive 2 Units of Study / 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Students identified as Transitioning or Expanding receive the mandated 1 Unit of Study / 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students identified as Commanding receive the mandate .5 Units of Study / 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Dual Language classrooms use Reading Streets resources and the Fundations program to teach literacy in English. Calle de la Lectura and Estrellita are used to teach literacy in Spanish. Reading Streets and Calle are resources purchased through Pearson which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Fundations and Estrellita are phonics programs which support our literacy instruction. The Spanish and the English programs are aligned with one another and provide native language support to ensure students are not losing important content / skills because of language acquisition. The Envision program by Pearson is used for math resources in both Spanish and English . Spanish supports including technology and videos are provided to support instruction in the Spanish classes. Social Studies is taught by the classroom teachers in both Spanish and English on alternating days. Students receive instruction in both languages to ensure content is not compromised. Science is taught by a cluster teacher in English with ELL supports such as word walls, pictures, hands-on learning experiences, 2018-19 CEP 55  videos and the partnering of native Spanish speakers with native English speakers. Students in our monolingual Special Education 12:1:1 receive their mandated instructional minutes using an integrated approach. The ENL teacher collaborates with the SPED teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Entering ENL students whose home language is Spanish are administered the Spanish Lab to assess their Spanish proficiency. Students are also assessed using the Estrellita reading program regularly. Additionally, since we are a Dual Language School we use the Evaluacion de la Lectura to assess our students progress in the target or home language. This assessment is administered in the January and May. With a goal of having all students graduate bilingual and biliterate, all students are tested in all areas of the curriculum in both English and the target language. Students receive all formative, summative and cumulative assessments in both languages. In addition, the students engage in monthly writing and math tasks that are aligned to the Common Core, and alternate monthly between completing the tasks in each language. Content knowledge and reading skills and strategies for ENL students are assessed quarterly through a dialogue with both the Spanish and the English teacher. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) At the present time we don't have any SIFE students. When we do acquire SIFE students, we will provide extra support for SIFE Students by differentiating instruction to fit their needs. Elm Tree Elementary will offer RTI , use of technology, small group instruction, and an After School and Saturday school to provide as much support as possible. b) Kindergarten teachers analyze the NYSITELL results as well as Fountas and Pinnell data to form differentiated instructional groups for newcomer ENL students.Grade 1 through 3 teachers analyze NYSESLAT Data and modalities to differentiate instruction based on student needs. Additionally, all teachers assess daily and collect data from formative and summative assessments as well as running records and daily observations. Student grouping is fluid and changes continually depending upon the skill or content. c) For ELL students that have been receiving service for 4 to 6 years, and are developing ENL students,English and native language support will be provided through small group instruction, differentiation, and the use of technology. d) For long term ENL students extra support will be provided through small group instruction, differentiation, and use of technology. e) For former ENL students support will continue to be provided for two years.Students will receive 90 minutes of instruction per week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL students with IEPs are provided the opportunity to learn in the least restrictive environment in our Dual Language ICT class on each grade. Students learn alongside their general education peers with support and modified entry points when needed. Bilingual Special Education teachers travel between English and Spanish classes with the students to ensure language 2018-19 CEP 56  support is provided when needed. Self-contained monolingual classes with students identified as ENL students receive support from a TESOL certified teacher for the mandated minutes per week. Scaffolds are provided such as visuals, manipulatives, and vocabulary to ensure and accelerate English language development. All students are provided with extra support through RTI in small group instruction 3x per week. Use of a Promethean board and an ELMO to display visuals in a larger format are available. Students are also provided with laptops, ipads, smart tables, and kindles to access online reading programs purchased by the school to accelerate language development in schools as well as from home. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD participate in an ICT Classroom that is also part of our Dual Language Program. One Spanish speaking Special Education teacher travels with the class between Spanish and English instruction. Students are placed in the ICT class depending on what is indicated on their IEP. Our self contained 12:1:1 class is provided with a Push in ENL teacher to provide scaffolding and any vocabulary necessary to provide access to the lessons. IEP's are viewed, updated, and discussed with collaborating teachers to ensure that the students meet their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELA intervention program which focuses on our ENL newcomers consists of a combination of two programs, Fountas and Pinnell leveled literacy intervention and Fundations. Curriculum focuses on phonics, letter work, guided reading, drill, story time, word play and dictation. Evaluacion de la lectura and Estrellita are used for intervention in Spanish literacy. Additionally, guided reading groups are formed based on data collected and formed in both languages.The same programs are used for our developing ENL students. Our developing ENL students will also be provided with the opportunity to assist the afterschool program and Saturday academy. Our Math intervention program is supplemented by Envisions in both English and the target language Spanish. Envisions provides our students with additional practice in areas that have been proven to cause great difficulty for our ENL students which are acquiring a new language. Targeted Intervention in Social Studies and Science are provided through reading remediation and writing interventions. Non-fiction texts support the content areas of Social Studies and Science while providing instruction in reading non-fiction materials. Spanish classrooms provide additional support by including reading science and social studies themed text in the target language Spanish to support the students native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year,we will implement an afterschool program and Saturday school program which will provide academic support in literacy and math. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None at the present time. 2018-19 CEP 57  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As a K-4 School with a 49% ENL population we afford equal access to all school programs for all of our ENL students through our Dual Language Program. ENL students have access to the same curriculum and supports as their native English speaking peers. We ensure that our ENL students have equal access to all school programs by creating programs that will support the learning of a new language. During the school day we provide our ENL students with our RTI program which focuses on phonics, letter work, guided reading, drill, story time, word play and dictation. This year we will implement an After School Program that will focus on our ENL population. Our After School program will be offered two days a week for one hour and a half. The After School curriculum will include extra support with phonics, reading,d writing, and math. We will also be able to provide a 30 minute block for technology. Additionally, we will provide a Saturday program to our ENL population. Cultural celebrations also play a role in the success of our students by providing a learning environment in which different cultures are celebrated and the students feel that their culture is represented and acknowledged in our community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For ELA and HLA support we use the Pearson Reading Streets Program and its Spanish companion, Calle de la Lectura, both with Smartboard interactive components are used to support ENL students. For Math we use Envision which provides extensive manipulatives and Smartboard interactive components in both languages. For Social Studies we use the Core Curriculum which is provided in both Spanish and English. For literacy skills we use Fundations for English and Estrellita for Spanish. For Science we use Foss hands on Classroom libraries are provided in both languages Art and Music build language and allow students to express themselves Laptops, iPads and eReaders for small group instruction Imagine Learning available in Spanish RAZ KIDS and Smarty Ants 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At Elm Tree Elementary School, Instruction for ENLs is delivered using a 50/50 model of a collaborative Dual Language program. The students receive instruction in their native language on one day and in English the next day so that content is equally delivered in both the home language and the new language. The program model is a block model that is grade level and heterogeneous. Students travel between the two classes as a group. In addition to receiving instruction on alternating days in their native language, our Guidance Counselor and our ENL Coordinator provide support throughout the day in their native language. Students are never without a means to express themselves, or placed in a situation where they cannot communicate. For EP students the target language support is provided through small group instruction, the use of ell 2018-19 CEP 58  strategies, word walls, teacher support, and the use of technology. Language support necessary is assessed through Evaluacion de la Lectura and the Estrellita reading program periodically. We also analyze the progress of our ENL students using the data supplied through the EDAT which gives us an analyses and at risk levels for our ENL students using NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math State Exam data. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service support and resources correspond to ENL students age and grade levels. Students receive grade level instruction in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Additional support gleaned from best practices in supporting language learners is used in all classrooms. Students are instructed at grade level and receive additional scaffolds for academic language support. Students in need of remedial services receive RTI instruction. Teachers modify entry points for grade level instruction when necessary. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At the present time we share a building with Mosaic Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten classes from PS 19. We ensure that all of our ENL students academic and linguistic needs are met by providing equal resources in both English and their native language Spanish. We also coordinate with the other schools when planning parent orientations, workshops, and events. Providing events and workshops for parents in both language provide socioemotional support for both students and parents. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year, we hold a parent meet the teacher night. The parents and students are invited to meet the teacher and discuss student expectations and curriculum. Additional staff is there such as the school guidance counselor, ENL coordinator, ENL provider, RTI providers, Speech, PT, and OT providers, Art. Music, Physical Education, Library teacher, as well as the assistant principal and principal to provide any extra support. Meetings are provided in both languages. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All content is delivered in English as well as the target language which is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The model of instruction is side-by-side dual language. Students are placed in classes which strive for a 50-50 placement of EPs and ENL students. All content areas are taught equally in both English and Spanish. Students schedules follow an AB program. They learn all day in Spanish one day, and the following day they learn all day in English. Over the course of two weeks this provides students with 50% of learning time in each language. 2018-19 CEP 59  Emergent literacy is taught in both languages, on alternating days. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Elm Tree Elementary provides ongoing professional development for all personnel and the entire staff. Professional development is scheduled for Mondays from 220-340 and Tuesdays from 220-3:35. Teachers also attend outside workshops and are expected to turn key any new strategies learned. The following PDs will be attended outside of school: Fundations -Phonics Estrellita- Phonics Responsive Classroom EDAT Training ELLevating Conference Title III LEP Plan Preparation PD NYSABE Annual Conference NYSITELL Training NYSESLAT Training 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At the current time we only have grade K through 4. Our school will ensure that we meet the professional development requirements by creating and developing PDs that focus on language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content for ENL students . Agendas and attendance will be created and kept in the professional development binder. Professional Development will include but will not be limited to: Creating a Language Support Environment for the ENL Student Best Practices for ENL students Updating the Langauage Allocation Policy Unpakcing the NYSESLAT Test Unpacking the NYSESLAT Data Building Academic Language for ENL students Supporting Speaking and Conversation for ENL students in the Classroom Estrellita Training-Phonics in the Spanish Classroom EDAT Data Share How to Support our ENL At Risk Students 2018-19 CEP 60  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? When the school year begins, the school offers the parents an opportunity to meet the teachers to discuss our Dual Language Program. At this meeting we explain our school philosophy and answer any questions that the parents may have about our Dual Language Program. Parents are invited to their child's classroom where curriculum and expectations are discussed. All information is translated by the bilingual teacher. Additionally, the school provides several ENL parent orientation meetings to discuss and complete the parent survey and program agreement form. Parents watch the NYCDOE parent choice video, in their preferred language, which explains each of the three programs that are available for their child and are free to ask any questions that they may have. If translation is necessary in a language that the school doesn't have available the Translation Services Unit is called. As per the DR Part 154 regulations, in addition to all parent teacher conferences, teachers ensure that parents of ENL students attend conference opportunities on Tuesday afternoons or any other time of their choosing, to discuss their child's language development progress, their child's progress and language development needs in all content areas. Attendance data is kept by teachers to monitor the need for future outreach. Additionally, to prepare the parents and students for NYSESLAT testing, we hold several NYSESLAT workshops which explain what the NYSESLAT is as well as explain each modality of the exam. Examples are provided for student preparation. Teachers are available for translation at any of the discussed events and all letters ate translated in the parents native language. If necessary the Translation Services Unit is called. To ensure that parents are aware of these events we send home letters, send phone blasts, and ensure that it is marked on the school calendar. All letters are sent in the student's home language. Additionally, we now offer communication through School CNXT which is an app in which parents and teachers can communicate in any language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All workshops, PTA meetings, SLT meetings, calendars, posters, and flyers are translated to the language preferred by parent/guardian. Parents are welcomed and encouraged to come in for any assistance needed as well as participate in all school events. Our PTA and SLT both have ENL parents as executive chair members. All meetings are conducted in both languages English and Spanish. Ms. Lucia Ferreira, our Parent Coordinator is instrumental in planning, sending out notices and securing participants for all parent engagement activities. Parent opportunities include, but are not limited to: Meet the Teacher Night Parent Teacher Conferences Title I Meeting Mental Health Workshops Safety Meetings Dial A Teacher /At Home Activities workshop Attendance and Your Child's Grade Workshop The Importance of Fine Motor Development Workshop Keeping Your Child Safe from Medications Workshop Discipline Workshops Gardening Workshops CookShop for Parents Workshops Homework Help Workshops Cool Culture Workshops 2018-19 CEP 61  Summer Learning Workshop PTA Meetings SLT Meetings Thanksgiving Celebration Dual Language Celebration Kindergarten Stepping Up Christmas Cookies and Milk Fathers Day Activities Mothers Day Activities Dads Take Your Child to School Breakfast Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kristen Niven, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Elm Tree Elementary School School DBN: 24Q211 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kristen Niven Title Principal Thomas McLaughlin Assistant Principal Lucy Ferreira Parent Coordinator Nicole Fulgoni ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria DeJesus Perez Parent Barbara Long Teacher/Subject Area Valentina Moyano Teacher/Subject Area Christina Smith Janet Reilly Coach Coach Julissa Nicasio-Urena School Counselor Madeline Chan Yasmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member yasmin torres Karen Jerez Other SPED Teacher Isabel Contraras Alvaro Heinig Other Speech Pathologist Other Speech Provider Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/03/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q211 School Name: Elm Tree Elementary School Superintendent: Madeline Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Janet Reilly ENL Coordinator/LAC NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration the emergency card is completed by the parent. The parent indicates each parents preferred written language and oral language. Once registration papers are completed the ENL Coordinator conducts a Home Language Survey to determine if the child is eligible for testing. The last question on the HLIS ask the parent their preferred language of oral communication and written communication. All of this information is collected by the Ell Coordinator/Language Access Coordinator. The Coordinator can also run an RCPL list from ATS to receive this information. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Bengali Punjabi Tibetan Nepal Ukrainian Agadame 73 329 2 2 1 1 2 1 0 18% 80% .5% .5% .25% .25% .5% .25% 0% 75 327 2 2 1 1 2 1 1 18% 80% .5% .5% .25% .25% .5% .25% .25% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Beginning/End of the Year Protocols August/June Registration Forms April- ongoing Entitlement Letters September School Supply List June School Lunch Letters April-ongoing Elm Tree Elementary School Agenda September Parent Orientation Meeting/ Meet the Teacher Night Notifications September Transportation/Bus Information Letters September Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/DOE Website/ Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit ATS/Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit ATS/Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 66  Monthly Newsletters Ongoing School Calendar September- June PTA Letters September- June Workshop Invitations September- June School Events September-June School Reminders September- June Testing Notifications September- June Teacher Notifications September-June Homework Calendar Weekly Classroom Celebrations/notifications September-June Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/DOE Website/ Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff/Translation and Interpretation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School Registration Parent Orientation April-ongoing September Parent Survey and Choice Meeting September Parent Teacher Conferences Throughout the year PTA Meetings SLT Meetings Monthly Monthly School Events Through the year Parent Workshops Monthly Teacher/Parent Engagement Weekly Staff Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit Staff and/or Translation and Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 67  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, Elm Tree Elementary School will contact parents that cannot communicate in English, by using the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit for critical parent communication's in the form of a letter, notice, flyer etc. Elm Tree Elementary School will also use Blackboard Connect to send home a phone blast communicating any school emergencies in the preferred language. School CNXT will also be used to communicate any school emergencies, in the family's preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school will ensure that all staff members are aware of how to use translation services and over the phone interpretation services by providing a PD to staff in which explains all available resources and how to use these services . Elm Tree Elementary will plan a PD for September to ensure that all staff uses any available resources such as language line, translation services, etc. Elm Tree Elementary will also provide outreach via email to inform staff on language access requirements and resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Language Access Coordinator has attended training. A welcome poster is posted at the school entrance. The Language Identification Guide is also posted on the security desk and the Main Office. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents Guide to Language Access is sent home with the child and is available in the Main Office. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator and Parent Coordinator will gather feedback on available services through PTA meetings, SLT meetings, Parent Surveys, and informal conversations with parents.During the 2018-2019 school year we will develop a focus group of parents to identify ways to improve or add upon current school practices. 2018-19 CEP 69 
