2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q213 School Name: P.S. 213 THE CARL ULLMAN SCHOOL Principal: MEGAN MCCAULEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Carl Ullman Elementary School 26Q213 School Number (DBN): Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 231-02 67 th Avenue, Bayside, NY 11364 (718) 423-8747 (718) 423-8805 Phone Number: Fax: Beth Revello BRevello@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Megan McCauley Caryn Baron Cathy Grodsky Megan McCauley District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 631-6943 Phone Number: 718.631.6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens North Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov 718-391-8320 Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Megan McCauley Caryn Baron Cathy Grodsky Maura Frances Karen Glover Melissa Tweed *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rebecca Garcia Jina Chung Erin Jacques CarmenTsoi Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview School Vision 2018-19 CEP 9  Public School 213 will strive to create an environment that will enhance and strengthen student’s abilities to think critically, to question, to generate choices and solutions and to foster mutual respect within our school community. Our ultimate objective will be to promote children’s self esteem while creating a joy of learning that nurtures the highest standards of educational excellence. *To develop a literature-rich instructional program which encompasses all curricula areas. P.S. 213 Mission Statement *To provide a challenging educational program which engages all students in productive activities utilizing multiple intelligence strategies. *To utilize a variety of assessment techniques in order to attain maximum achievement of educational goals in compliance with State and City standards. *To encourage parental involvement in the learning process and shared-decision making ensuring children’s cognitive, creative and social growth. *To provide students with a solid foundation in order to meet the challenges of society in the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 213Q is recognized as a school of high standing in New York City. We have been recognized by the University of the State of New York Education Department as a “Reward School” since 2012 in leading New York State toward the accomplishment of educational excellence through an increase of student achievement and closing the gap in student performance. As a school community, we are committed to enhancing our student academic, social, and emotional growth through rigorous instruction. During the 2017-2018 school year, we incorporated the STEAM philosophy and interdisciplinary approach to learning into our curriculum. STEAM stands for science, technology, engineering, art, and math. STEAM education seeks to teach students to be creative, innovative, critical thinkers who can adapt to change and solve real world problems. In this rich learning experience, students work together to build upon their content knowledge in order to seek multiple solutions to real world problems. It is a synergistic approach to teaching the STEAM disciplines instead of isolating them as separate subjects. Our schoolwide belief is that if students develop the skills needed to think deeply and critically, then they will be prepared to become the innovators and leaders of our future. Our school STEAM Team, consisting of Parents and Teachers, worked together to research and design STEAM project based units of study for students in kindergarten through Grade 5. The units of study concluded with a STEAM Expo and Celebration. Below are the STEAM units of study topic and essential questions. Grade Unit of Study Essential Question Kindergarten Animal Habitat Unit of Study What improvements can be made in a habitat to help endangered animals survive? 2018-19 CEP 10  First Grade Pollinators Unit of Study Second Grade Third Grade Natural Disasters Unit of Study Computer Science Unit of Study Fourth Grade Architecture Unit of Study Fifth Grade Innoventors Unit of Study How can we ensure the plants in our garden continue to grow and flourish? How can communities better prepare for natural disasters? What is an algorithm and why do they matter? How do environmental factors reflect on the planning and design of a structure? How have inventors turned their ideas into realities? Can anyone be an inventor or innovator? For the 2018-2019 school year, we want to build upon this work to include two units of study that conclude in a STEAM Expo and Celebration. P.S. 213 incorporates the School-wide Enrichment Model (SEM), into our curriculum as an enrichment cluster model for students. The SEM approach supports rigorous instruction for all students aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Enrichment Clusters offer our students the opportunity to select activities from a menu of options and participate in them over a period of 7 – 10 weeks. Students engage in collaboratively choosing a goal, problem solving, and creating a product or activity that would benefit the school, the neighborhood, or the world in some way. All Kindergarten through Grade 5 classroom teachers involve their classes in Enrichment Activities during both the fall and spring. Student work products and performances culminate in Enrichment Showcases twice a year. Some examples of Enrichment Activities include: Lego Robotics, STEAM in Action, Mighty Milers, Little Chefs, Garden Club, Clothing Designers, Just Dance, Makerspace, and Nature Observers. We wouldn’t be able to offer these wonderful experiences to our students without the support of our generous PTA. In doing so our PTA has made a valuable contribution to our students’ education. P.S. 213 employs a balanced literacy and mathematics approach to learning in a workshop model format. Teachers work together in teacher teams to create unit plans that reflect the overarching standards, enduring understandings, and essential questions of each unit in reading, writing, and math. Using the practice of learning targets, teachers frame lessons from a students point of view. This is communicated though developmentally appropriate, student friendly, and culturally respectful language. Students in grades K-5 use the practice of Thinking Maps as a tool to cognitively organize their thinking as a way to prepare for discussion and writing across all content areas. The 4th and 5th Grade Teachers integrate Socratic Seminar into their instruction in order to support high level student discourse in the classroom. Socratic Seminar is a formal discussion, based on a text, in which the student leader asks open-ended questions. Within the context of the discussion, students listen closely to the comments of others, think critically for themselves, and articulate their own thoughts and their responses to the thoughts of others. The school has adopted the Teacher's COllege Reading and Writing curriculum. As a result of this work, the school will have a consistent and coherent approach to literacy instruction that supports students on the reading and writing continuum. During the 2016-2017 school year, P.S. 213 was identified as 1 of 12 schools across the New York City Department of Education as a "Collaborative School Community". As a showcase school, our school community demonstrated positive practices in collaboration between P.S. 213 and P.4 school communities. P.4 is a District 75 school co-located at P.S. 213. Both schools worked together to establish the "Seeds of Friendship" garden for students to use and learn 2018-19 CEP 11  from. In addition, the PTA's and SLT's worked together to offer both parent and community workshops. P.S 213 was also identified as a "Respect for All" school. We are proud of these awards. These initiatives align with the Framework for Great Schools Supportive Environment and Strong Family-Community Ties. During the 2017-2018 school year, P.S. 213 and P.4 were identified as a "Just Say Hi" school. In an effort to recognize positive behavior we created the P.S. 213 Soaring Dragon initiative. In this program certificates are awarded to classes in recognition of their outstanding citizenship and respectful behavior. Every time a class receives a certificate, a Dragon Badge is added to our P.S. 213 Soaring Dragon display board. At two intervals during the school year (mid-point and end of year) students from the classes (one upper and one lower) who received the most badges will receive coupons from our school store. Our goal has been to guide our students into making good decisions regarding their behavior in school and beyond. In recognition of the diversity of our school our PTA generously supports and participates in our yearly International Fair. This event engages and embraces our entire school community. Parents volunteer to work with groups of students over a period of several weeks, teaching them ethnic dances and dressing them in ethnic clothes. The students proudly perform for the entire school community. Parents also prepare and serve delicious ethnic foods for all of our students to taste and enjoy. A museum of artifacts, including clothing, games and activities from around the world are provided and displayed by our parents for all of our students to experience and enjoy. The International Fair further prepares our students for college and future careers through providing them with an increased awareness of the diversity of our school community. . Our fabulous PTA organizes school events throughout the year including the Halloween Dance, School Carnival, Movie Nights and supports our Grade 2 – 5 Talent Show. In recognition of our staff they provide a beautiful “Staff Appreciation Luncheon” and also provide support for our teachers to supplement their NYC DOE Teacher’s Choice funds. We are blessed to have such a supportive and committed partnership with our PTA. As a school community we believe that every child has unique talents and capabilities. Collaboratively we strive to work together to help all of our children achieve academically, creatively, socially and emotionally, fostering their development into becoming responsible citizens who will be the future leaders of our world. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have made a strong commitment to meeting the needs of all of our students. A major component of this effort has been the creation of Integrated Co-teaching (ICT) classes. P.S. 213 has ICT classes in Grade 1, Grade 2, and Grade 3. Teachers of ICT classes share common preparation planning time which is used to collaboratively plan in order to help all of their students meet the grade-level requirements of the CCLS. Progress on the Students with Disabilities is monitored not only by the ICT teachers but also by the members of the Pupil Personnel Team. We have two ENL certified teachers In order to meet the needs of the 63 English as a New Language learners (ENLs) and 14 former English as a New Language learners. ENL services include both a push in and pull out model. In the push in model, ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to provide targeted instruction aligned to the learning and language objectives in a small group setting. 2018-19 CEP 12  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At P.S. 213 we believe that the emotional development of our students is as important as their academic development. In order to foster a Supportive Environment to align with the Framework for Great Schools, our Guidance Counselor has facilitated a Peer Mediators initiative for our Grade 4 and 5 students. In this program select students were trained to be mediators and would help their classmates resolve conflicts in a productive way. In an effort to reach both our upper grade students, as well as our lower grade students, our Guidance Counselor implemented an initiative to develop skills in conflict resolution for all students, Kindergarten – Grade 5. Individual classroom lessons have been provided by our Guidance Counselor for each class focused on topics including but not limited to positive school behavior, friendship, and respect for others. Through this effort we are truly preparing our students with life skills which will help them for future college and career situations. as a result, our school community received 100% positive response in Safety and Social-emotional learning. As a result of the data analysis conducted by the school Professional Learning team, the grade level professional learning teams will conduct at least two cycles of inquiry focused on meeting the instructional needs of students approaching grade level. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q213 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 467 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 17 16 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 19 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 56.0% % Attendance Rate 48.4% % Reduced Lunch 12.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 15.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.14 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 21 22 19 94.3% 6.9% 11.6% 6.0% 66.8% 2.1% 2 0% 7.8 68.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYS ELA Levels Year Level 3&4 Level 2 Level 1 2016 62.6% 2017 64.0% 2018 70.5% 30.4% 7.0% 25.0% 7.0% 22.5% 7.0% The School Leadership Team, Data Specialist Team and Administrators reviewed the progress of our Grade 3 – 5 students as measured by the results of the NYS ELA Assessment for 2016, 2017 and 2018. Over the last three years, we have made progress in decreasing the amount of students who are achieving a level 2. We have focused on tracking students who are reading below grade level in literacy, as identified by the Teachers College Reading and Writing Assessments in order to target Response to Intervention Tier I and Tier II literacy interventions. We will continue to track students who are reading below grade level for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, at least 85% of students will increase in their independent reading level to a minimum of 3 levels including ELLs and SWDs, as measured by the TCRWP Running Records Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Programs Teachers will utilize the CCLS-aligned TCRWP Reading and Writing Units of Study as a resource in all classes K – 5. In addition, common performance based assessments and standards based rubrics will be determined and implemented by grade level teacher teams. Teachers will employ Thinking Maps as a strategy to help students organize and frame their thinking. Thinking Maps will be embedded in the writing process as a pre-planning strategy. Students will engage in discussion protocols that require them to formulate questions, initiate topics, and challenge peer's thinking. Teachers will provide small group instruction to support students in literacy instruction. Strategies to Address Student Subgroups  Classroom teachers will assess on an on-going basis the reading levels of all students in Grades K-5 at least 4 times a year utilizing the Teachers College Reading Assessments.  Collaborative Inquiry-based grade level teacher teams will study student work of specific student subgroups (approaching grade level) in order to monitor progress. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal Fall 2018 – Spring 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Teachers Students Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods Principal Fall 2018 – Spring 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Teachers Mondays Professional Learning time 2018-19 CEP 16  Engaging Families Parents and Guardians  Teachers will communicate with parents in various ways including, but not limited to: o Tuesday Parent Engagement Time o Conferences scheduled during Preparation Periods o Monthly Classroom Newsletters o Planning Parent Workshops o Formal Parent-Teacher Conferences o Inviting Parents to Classroom Celebrations Professional Learning and Trust  Teachers and administrators will demonstrate and build trust by collaboratively identifying areas of need and planning professional development, focused on improving students’ comprehension skills in reading. Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods September, 2018 – June, 2019 Tuesdays Parent Engagement Time Classroom teachers Cluster & Support teachers Paraprofessionals Principal and Assistant Principal School Community September, 2018 – June, 2019 All teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 17  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Coffee with the Principal, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly SLT Meetings, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Provide each classroom teacher with Columbia University’s TCRWP Reading Assessments for independent reading levels. Provide individual Reading Pacing Charts for the purpose of monitoring each student’s reading progress throughout the year. ● Teachers providing AIS instruction will utilize components of the TCRWP curriculum. Services may be provided on a push-in or pull-out basis. ● Teachers will utilize the Monday 80 Minute Professional Development time and their collaborative planning time in order to conduct inquiry-based grade-level study of student work and performance, monitoring the progress of subgroups of students (ELL, above grade level, and below grade level). ● Professional Development will be provided as follows: o Common Prep Planning Time o Monthly Borough Training Sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, at least 60% of students including ELLs and SWDs will have made progress in their TCRWP Running Records that demonstrates they are meeting their independent reading goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Literacy Performance based Assessments and Grade Level CCLS-aligned rubrics and checklists Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on feedback received from our District wide Collaborative Round, Principal Performance Observations, and Summative Conversations with Teachers, the school has identified a need to continue to provide students with actionable and meaningful feedback that is anchored to standards based rubrics. In order to further support and challenge students in taking ownership of their learning, our feedback cycle will include opportunities for students to self reflect and provide peer feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all students, including ELLS and SWDs, will show growth in their independent writing levels for narrative, opinion/argument, and informational writing as measured by the TCRWP Writing baseline and summative assessments. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs K-5 adoption of Teachers College Writing Units of Study, including standards based rubrics and checklists. Collaborative study of TCRWP Performance Based Assessments and Standards Based Rubrics. Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Students K-5 TCRWP Grade Level Lead Teacher will attend professional learning sessions and turnkey information during teacher team collaborative planning and implementation meetings. Grade level and cross grade collaborative teacher discussions sharing best practices for providing actionable and meaningful feedback to students aligned to standards based rubrics and supporting and challenging students in self-reflection and peer feedback. Students will learn how to give a positive comment and next step based on standards based rubrics and/or checklists. Strategies to address Student Subgroups Teachers will collaboratively plan for and implement TCRWP Writing Units of Study and common standards based rubrics that will provide multiple entry points to further meet the needs of ELLs, students performing below grade level, and students performing above grade level. Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Students 2018-19 CEP 20 Teachers will track the progress of students learning through the use of checklists and/or conference notes in order to challenge and support all students. Provide professional learning for teachers in the areas of providing meaningful and actionable feedback aligned to standards based rubrics. Engaging Families Teachers will communicate with parents in various ways including, but not limited to:  Tuesday Parent Engagement Time  Conferences scheduled during Preparation Periods  Monthly Classroom Newsletters  Planning Parent Workshops   Formal Parent-Teacher Conferences Inviting Parents to Classroom Celebrations Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Classroom teachers Cluster & Support teachers Paraprofessionals Principal and Assistant Principal Professional Learning and Trust Teachers and administrators will demonstrate and build trust by collaboratively working together to improve teacher practice in the area feedback. Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Sept. 2018– June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Coffee with the Principal, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly SLT Meetings, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common prep planning time, 80 Minute PD time, 35 Min. Parent Engagement time, 30 Min. Other Professional Work time, Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric, Common Core Learning Standards, Vertical Data Inquiry Team, Assistant Principal and Principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 21  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of all students, including ELLS and SWDs, will show growth in their independent writing levels for narrative, opinion/argument, and informational writing as measured by the TCRWP Writing baseline and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Literacy Performance based Assessments and Grade Level CCLS-aligned rubrics and checklists Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Year Level 3&4 Level 2 Level 1 2016 62.6% 2017 64.0% 2018 70.5% 30.4% 7.0% 25.0% 7.0% 22.5% 7.0% The School Leadership Team, Data Specialist Team and Administrators reviewed the progress of our Grade 3 – 5 students as measured by the results of the NYS ELA Assessment for 2016, 2017 and 2018. We noted that in the writing standards component of the ELA exam, our students struggled with the constructed and extended response questions. As a result of this finding, as well as partnering with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project in the adoption of the reading and writing units of study, we are focused on enhancing writing practices in a Kindergarten through fifth grade continuum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will be involved in collaborative inquiry-based teacher teams for at least 2 cycles that analyze student data to determine a problem of practice aligned to the school wide instructional focus as reflected in the planning and preparation of appropriate resources and materials and the intentional grouping of students evidenced by a 10% increase in the average proficiency of Danielson 1e. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Programs Teachers CCLS-aligned TCRWP Reading and Writing Units of Study will be implemented in all grades, K-5. September, 2018 – June, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Teachers will utilize writing performance based tasks and rubrics to conduct a gap analysis in student work in order to identify an explicit problem of practice to engage in an collaborative grade level inquiry study. K-5 TCRWP Grade Level Lead Teacher will attend professional learning sessions and turnkey information during teacher teams collaborative planning and implementation meetings. A consistent protocol will be utilized to analyze student work and identify student sub-groups strengths and next steps. Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods Teachers will reflect on impact on teacher practice as a result of the inquiry student and share best practices with vertical teams. Strategies to address Student Subgroups Principal Classroom teachers, K-5, will assess on an on-going basis the literary and Informational writing levels of all students and adjust instruction to included targeted learning strategies for identified subgroups. Assistant Principal Teachers September 2018 – June, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Support Staff Mondays Professional 2018-19 CEP 24  Collaborative Inquiry-based grade level teacher teams will study student work of specific student subgroups (ENLs, SWD's, below, on, and above grade level) in order to monitor their progress in academic writing. Engaging Families Parents & Guardians Teachers and administrators will communicate with parents in various ways including, but not limited to: All Teachers Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods September 2018 – June, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal o Tuesday Parent Engagement Time o Conferences scheduled during Preparation Periods o Monthly Classroom Newsletters o Planning Parent Workshops o Formal Parent-Teacher Conferences o Inviting Parents to Classroom Celebrations Professional Learning and Trust An environment of trust will be strengthened through the following collaborative practices. o Grade-level teachers will collaboratively study student work sharing strategies focused on meeting the differentiated needs of their students. o This collaborative practice will be expanded upon during cross grade meetings in which teachers will have the opportunity to problem solve and share best practices with their colleagues teaching on other grade levels. This practice will help to ensure coherence throughout the school. o Teachers and administrators will demonstrate and build trust by collaboratively identifying areas of need and planning professional development, focused on improving students’ academic writing. Teachers Assistant Principal Principal Tuesdays Parent Engagement Time Classroom Teachers, support Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal and Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers, support Teachers, Paraprofessionals Assistant Principal Principal September 2018 – June, 2019 Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time 2018-19 CEP 25  Common Planning Periods 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Coffee with the Principal, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly SLT Meetings, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Provide each classroom teacher, K-5, with the CCLS-aligned TCRWP Writing Units of Study, benchmark writing tasks and rubrics. ● Teachers will utilize the Monday, 80 Minute Professional Development time and their collaborative planning time in order to conduct inquiry-based grade-level study of student work in academic writing, monitoring the progress of subgroups of students (ENLs, SWD's, below, on, and above grade level) utilizing “Inquiry Cycle” tracking sheets. ● Time will be provided for teachers to collaboratively share strategies and best practices at cross-grade inquiry team meetings ● Professional Development will be provided as follows: o Monday 80 Minute Professional Development time o Common Prep Planning Time o TCRWP Professional Development Series Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, of teachers will be involved in collaborative inquiry-based teacher teams for at least 1 cycle that analyzes student data to determine a problem of practice aligned to the school wide instructional focus as reflected in the planning and preparation of appropriate resources and materials and the intentional grouping of students evidenced by a 10% increase in the average proficiency of Danielson 1e. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inquiry Cycle Tracking Sheets, Best Practices Document, Grade Level Reflection Sheet, and Agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Indicator 4.2c for “Well Developed” states, “Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school.” In an effort to meet the requirements of this QR Indicator, teachers are encouraged to take on leadership roles within the school. As a school community, we are adopting a new writing program. In an effort to support teachers in unpacking the curriculum, analyzing student data to effectively adjust the curriculum, and develop effective pedagogical practices that align with the units of study, Based on the 2017-2018 Environment Survey, the SLT have identified the need to increase the percentage of teachers who will share in the leadership roles and decision-making regarding instruction and school practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the number of teachers who will share in leadership roles to improve teacher practice and/or inform parents on strategies to assist their children in their academic and social/emotional growth as evidenced by a 10% increase in the average proficiency of Danielson 4e. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs All teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 All teachers ● TCRWP and Borough Lead teachers will attend monthly PD meetings and turn key information to the staff at in-school professional development meetings. Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Principal ● Grade level and cross grade meetings will be held so that teachers have the opportunity to share and exchange ideas and instructional strategies in order to improve student performance. Principal Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods Strategies to address Student Subgroups All teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 All teachers ● Special Education Liaison will attend monthly professional development meetings and turn key information to the staff. Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Principal ● ENL Liaison will attend monthly professional development meetings and turn key information to the staff. Principal ● Teachers will hold grade level inquiry team meetings focused on student subgroups (ENLs, SWD's, below, on, and above grade level) in order to study student work, determine next steps and inform instruction. Mondays Professional Learning time 2018-19 CEP 29  Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods Engaging Families ● Teachers will present professional development for parents/guardians on various topics such as: ELA and Math strategies to assist their children at home., incorporating art, music and technology at home ● Guidance Counselor will present professional development workshops for parents/guardians to inform them of strategies to use at home to assist their children’s social/emotional growth. Professional Learning and Trust All Parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019 All teachers All teachers Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor AP Principal All teachers Tuesdays Parent Engagement Time AP Principal Sept. 2018 – June 2019 AP ● In order to establish a culture of trust and learning that motivates teachers to volunteer to take leadership roles the Principal and Assistant Principal will: AP Principal Principal o Be available to all teachers to discuss and brainstorm ideas and problem solve regarding areas of concern o Request input of professional development from the Professional Development Committee and other members of the staff o Celebrate teachers as learners by providing time for grade level and cross grade teacher meetings enabling teachers to study student work, identify next steps, share strategies, and collaboratively problem solve in order to inform their instruction and improve student performance. Mondays Professional Learning time Tuesdays Other Professional Time Common Planning Periods 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 30  Monthly Coffee with the Principal, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly SLT Meetings, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. EngageNY resources, ELA Lead Teachers, Math Lead Teachers, Special Education Liaison, ESL Liaison, All teachers, DOE professional development, 80 Minute Professional Development time, 35 Minute Parent Engagement Time, 30 Minute Other Professional Work time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the number of teachers who will share in leadership roles to improve teacher practice and/or inform parents on strategies to assist their children in their academic and social/emotional growth as evidenced by a 5% increase in the average proficiency of Danielson 4e. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Lead Teachers Agendas and PL Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: On our School Survey 97% of our parents responded that they feel welcome in our school and 96% of our parents responded that the school keeps them informed about what their children are learning. 97% of the parents responded that there is an adult whom their children trust and can go to for help with their problems, and 99% agreed that students with disabilities are included in all school activities. ● Areas of Need: In contrast only 67% of our parents responded that they had been invited to an event at their child’s school (workshop, program, performance, etc.). ● Based on the analysis of this data, members of our School Leadership Team along with our Data Specialist and administration determined that we must make it our priority to increase parent participation in school/community events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, there will be at least 5 community events offered to parents and families and there will be at least 50% family participation in at least three of these events as measured by attendance records. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Programs o Parent Workshops and orientation meetings will be planned and presented by staff to inform parents and provide them with strategies to support their children’s academic, social and emotional growth. o Parent Coordinator will outreach to parents utilizing the School Messenger Communication Service in order to share important school-related information. Strategies to address Student Subgroups o Parent workshops will be offered to address the specific needs of English Language Learners. o Parent workshops will be offered to address the specific needs of Students with Disabilities. o Translators will be provided to ensure clear communication between parents and teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and Caregivers September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Parents and Caregivers September 2018 – June 2019 Paraprofessionals Support Staff Principal and Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers Paraprofessionals Support Staff Principal and Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers Paraprofessionals Support Staff Principal and Assistant Principal PTA Executive Board Members School Leadership Team Members Parent Community Engaging Families o Parent surveys Parents and Caregivers September 2018 – June 2019 o PTA Meetings inclusive of Student of the Month recognition ceremonies o Open School Week o September Parent Orientation o Parent/Teacher Conferences o Parent Engagement Workshops o International Fair 2018-19 CEP 33  o Talent Show o Fall Halloween Dance and Spring Carnival o Science Fair o Student Art Shows o Student Chorus Concerts o Drama Club performance o Parent attendance at class celebrations Professional Learning and Trust o Parents and school staff trust that they are all respected and supported in their respective roles as educators and parents resulting in strengthening the home/school connection. School Staff Parents and Caregivers September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Paraprofessionals Support Staff Principal and Assistant Principal PTA Executive Board Members School Leadership Team Members Parent Community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Monthly Coffee with the Principal, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly SLT Meetings, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. o School Messenger Communication System o Tuesday Parent Engagement Time o Planning time for teachers and staff members to plan parent workshops 2018-19 CEP 34  o Organization and scheduling of time and space for parents to work with students in preparation for the school International Fair o Parent Coordinator o School Staff o Members of the School Leadership Team o Members of the PTA Executive Board Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, there will have been at least three community events offered to parents and families and there will have been at least 50% participation in at least two of those community events as measured by attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Document Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Method of delivery of service When the service is provided ● Small Group ● During the day ● One-to-one Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified for AIS services based on performance in class and/or on the standardized tests. All students are screened using TCRWP assessments. Teachers analyze the data and plan standards based core instruction. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA AIS service provided during the school day. Students in grades K through 5 receive small group instruction for reading and writing. Teachers utilize best practices from Columbia University Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Project and ReadyGen to develop decoding, fluency, word recognition, comprehension and critical thinking skills, as well as, writing. In Tier I, all students are screened using TCRWP assessments. Teachers analyze the data and plan CCLS-aligned instruction. Students receive instruction that is based on research based best practices. The classroom teacher utilizes both the ReadyGen resources and Columbia University Teachers College 2018-19 CEP 36  Reading and Writing Project for literacy. Tier II interventions are designed to provide supplemental, focused teaching and learning opportunities for a small group of students who are not responding to Tier I instruction and interventions. Students who receive Tier II interventions also continue to receive Tier I instruction. The interventions are designed to remediate students’ basic skills. Tier II interventions take place during regular classroom instruction. The school uses Teachers College, Fundations, and Wilson Reading System as intervention tools. Tier III interventions provide more individualized, intense teaching and learning opportunities for students who are not achieving grade level expectations and who are not responding to Tier II interventions. More intensive interventions are achieved with a smaller student-teacher ratio, a longer duration of instruction, detailed 2018-19 CEP 37  Mathematics Students are identified for AIS services based on performance in class and/or on the standardized tests. Science Students are identified for AIS services based on performance in class and/or on the standardized tests. attention to individual learning styles and the social environment, and more frequent progress monitoring. As in Tier II, students who receive Tier III interventions continue to receive core instruction. Tier III instruction can occur during the normal school hours. Furthermore, many students receiving Tier III interventions will continue to require support in all three tiers in order to accelerate progress by the end of the intervention period. Math AIS service provided during the school day. Students in grades K through 5 receive small group instruction for problem solving, reasoning and proof as well as building fluency. Teachers utilize best practices and resources from Envisions curriculum and Exemplars. Students in all grades work on problem solving using reasoning and proof as well as learning their math facts. Science AIS service is provided by the science teacher and classroom teachers through the use of literacy and math practices in small groups with a focus Method of delivery of service When the service is provided ● Small Group ● During the day ● One-to-one Method of delivery of service When the service is provided ● Small Group ● During the day ● One-to-one 2018-19 CEP 38 Social Studies Students are identified for AIS services based on performance in class and/or on the standardized ELA tests. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified for AIS services based on performance in class and/or on the standardized tests. on content and strategies. Social Studies/ELA AIS service is provided during the school day. Students in Grades K through 5 receive small group instruction for reading and writing. Teachers utilize best practices from Columbia University Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Project and the ReadyGen Reading Program to develop decoding, fluency, word recognition, comprehension and critical thinking skills, as well as, writing. At-risk services provided by the Common Branch certified teachers, SETSS, ESL, Speech, cluster teachers, Guidance Counselor, Occupational Therapy, and School Psychologist and Social Worker. Method of delivery of service When the service is provided ● Small Group ● During the day ● One-to-one Method of delivery of service When the service is provided ● Small Group ● During the day ● One-to-one 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  Funding is used to ensure all students are provided with the materials and resources needed to be successful in the classroom. Items such as folders, books, notebooks, paper, classroom trips, pens, pencils, etc. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Non-contractual Services: $1,612 Supplies: $6,071 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 43  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 213 The Carl Ullman School is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, and Parent Association. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 213The Carl Ullman School will support parents and families of students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● ensure that funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association). This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 46  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 213 The Carl Ullman School is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 47  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials 8 Transitioning students 7 Expanding students 2 Entering students 2 Emerging students 1 Transitioning student 1 Expanding student Begin description here: The ENL program model at P.S. 213Q during the school day is a Stand Alone Integrated English as a New Language Program. This is a push-in/pull-out program where the language of instruction is English. Our Title III After-School program will supplement our mandated program for English Language Learners (ELLS). We will have two ten-week semesters where we invite targeted groups of ELLs. Students will be grouped according to grade level and/or their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The first semester will take place once a week on Wednesdays from October 10th to January 2nd. It will consist of 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grade ELLs, for a total number of 27 ELLs served in the first semester. 2nd grade ELLs will be divided into two groups, while 3rd, 4th and 5th will be combined. The second semester will take place once a week on Wednesdays from January 9th to March 27th. It will consist of Kindergarten (Transitioning and Expanding only) and 1st grade ELLs, for a total number of 26 ELLs served in the second semester. Kindergarten will be divided into one Transitioning group and one Expanding group, while 1st grade will be in one group. Each teacher’s group will be no less than 5 students and no greater than 12 students. In Kindergarten, we have: · · In 1st grade, we have: · · · · In 2nd grade, we have: · · · In 3rd grade, we have: · · In 4th grade, we have: · · In 5th grade, we have: · The Title III After-School Program will be in session from October 10th to March 27th for a total number of 20 sessions, divided into 2 semesters. We will operate on Wednesdays from 2:20 PM to 4:20 PM. Small group instruction will be provided by 3 certified ENL teachers under the direction and supervision of an instructional leader. Attendance and other records will be maintained by each teacher. First and foremost, we will create an environment where all feel respected and are actively involved. In order to ensure that each child feels that their culture is valued, we will ensure students have the time and space to share about special holidays, their home language, 3 Emerging students 6 Transitioning students 7 Expanding students 1 Transitioning student 5 Expanding students 1 Transitioning student 3 Expanding students 1 Emerging student 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and family cuisine. Our academic objectives are to raise student comprehension levels of academic text using content-specific vocabulary along with increased inferential reasoning skills. Thus, the program will employ a combination of online reading instruction using the research-based program RAZ Kids, for a quarter of the time, with another quarter of the time devoted to NYSESLAT test prep and the rest of the time allotted to hands-on STEM projects using ETA Hand2Mind STEM kits, which will only be used during Title III After-School and not during the school day. With the CS4ALL & STEAM initiative within New York City, Title III After-School will be utilizing the Hand2Mind STEM in Action kits. These STEM in Action kits are designed to provide students with hands-on activities to supplement language learning and English acquisition. In addition, the lessons within the STEM in Action kits will provide ELLS with access to authentic and original learning opportunities. These activities will prompt discussions, provide problem solving projects and promote critical thinking by using Tier 2 and Tier 3 vocabulary words. Through the use of these kits, students will be able to take ownership of their own learning. Strategies learned from STEM in Action kits will be implemented to foster community, confidence and engagement. In addition to the hands-on learning in Title III, students will also receive online literacy and language instruction and support with RAZ Kids from Learning A-Z. Students will take an assessment to determine their reading levels and RAZ Kids provides students with fiction and nonfiction books and comprehension questions on their independent and instructional reading levels. Teachers can track student data and growth and parents receive reports of student progress. As Title III homework, students can use the program at home with their families. Finally, students will participate in standards-based activities in which they share and compare in order to increase their academic vocabulary and cultural experiences. Students will also use computer programs for reports and presentations. They will also access and utilize computer programs to aid emergent literacy skills, promote phonemic awareness and enhance vocabulary, listening and speaking skills. In addition, we will use NYSESLAT test prep materials from Attanasio Publishers to prepare students for the format of tests, which is especially important in the lower grades where students have not yet been exposed to high stakes standardized testing and multiple choice format tests. Finally, we will purchase literature and trade books, listening center books, reader's theater kits, and guided reading sets to be used by the students during Title III time after STEM and NYSESLAT time is over. Our ELLs need immersion in quality literature to improve their literacy skills in English. Materials used for Title III are supplemental to those utilized during the regular school day. Items purchased with Title III funding will be utilized solely for Title III students. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The ENL teachers will meet for curriculum development focus groups in order to enhance literacy and STEM instruction for our ELL population for a total number of 6.5 hours per teacher. The ENL teachers will attend Monday PDs after students dismiss which are facilitated by administration or staff members. Outside of that, the ENL teachers will be attending professional learning opportunities given by Queens North Field Support Center as well as by 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network at Fordham University. These opportunities will support the instructional growth of the ELL teachers by exploring various research-based topics on ELL pedagogy. Dates include: October 19 (ELL Liaison), October 26 (Academic Discussions), November 8 (ELL Data) , December 6 (ELL Liaison), December 12 (Academic Discussions), December 14 (Next Generation Learning Standards), January 18 (ESSA), March 21 (ELL Liaison), and June 18 (ELL Liaison). The hours for a most of these workshops are 8:30am – 2:30pm, with the exception of a half-day one which is 9am – 12:30pm (ESSA). rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: In addition to student instruction, the parents of our Title III program students will be invited to three 2-hour meetings, and we will provide interpretation in home languages. The meetings will provide parents with strategies on how they can help improve and support their child’s English language acquisition as well as information on the NYSESLAT. Invitation letters will be sent home to parents in English as well as in the families’ home languages. $90.97 of the budget will be used for refreshments for the three meetings. The first workshop will focus on how parents can read to their children to develop literacy skills in both English and home language as well as foster communication in their L1 as a conduit to acquiring L2. The first one will take place in December of 2018. This workshop is important because there is a misconception among many parents at our school that they must only speak to their children in English, and since many parents cannot speak English, they think they are doing their children a favor by not speaking to them at all, or they are providing their children with incorrect input. However, studies show that students who are proficient in L1 will acquire L2 much faster. The school needs to dispel myths about the use of L1 when acquiring L2. Likewise, parents should be encouraged to read to their children in their L1 if they do not speak and read in L2 because literacy in L1 leads to literacy in L2. In addition, parents will be informed of how to connect language development with content area. The second workshop will inform parents on how to help their children succeed on the NYSESLAT as well as provide pathways for home-school connections. It will take place in December of 2018, towards the end of the first semester of Title III After-School. It will target parents of ELLs in 2nd, 3rd, and 4th grades. The reason for holding workshops on NYSESLAT success is that many students are being administered a high-stakes test for the first time - either as lower-grade students who do not take the state exams OR as upper-grade newcomers who have yet to take the state exams. This provides parents and children with an opportunity to preview what they should expect to see on the NYSESLAT. It also allows parents to prepare their children at home to calmly and competently take these tests. The last workshop will be similar in content to the second workshop, but it will target parents of ELLs in Kindergarten and 1st grade, who will be attending Title III After-School for the second semester. The workshop will be held in January of 2019. The funding will be used for the 3 ENL teachers to present modeling of strategies by teachers followed by active participation of parents with their children as well as refreshments for the 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities parents. In addition to practical ideas provided by teachers, materials such as flash cards, visuals, games, content area books and dictionaries will be distributed to the parents in order to support their child’s learning at home. They will be encouraged to share content area texts, newspapers, and music in their home language, not only to support their child’s language in school but to continue development in the child’s home language. Invitations, agendas, and attendance sheets for all parent meetings will be kept in a binder in the ENL office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. BUDGET: 60% of $12,366 = $7,419.60 WE NEED: $7,278.00 each session = 2 hours 3 teachers teach 1 session/week = 2 hours per teacher per week 20 weeks x 2 hours/wk x $60.65/hr x 3 teachers = $7,278.00 needed for direct instruction BUDGET: 20% of $12,366= $2,473.20 2,365.35 10% for parent engagement = $1,236.60 allotted 6.5 hours dedicated to parent engagement 6.5 hours x $60.65 x 3 teachers = $1,182.68 We need $1,182.68 for parent engagement. 10% for professional development = $1,236.60 allotted 6.5 hours dedicated to professional development and curriculum development focus group 6.5 hours x $60.65 x 3 teachers = $1,182.68 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Wednesday After-school Program, 2:20 PM to 4:20 PM (Per Session Rate with Fringe Benefits: $60.65/hr) The first semester of Wednesday Sessions begins on October 10, 2018 and ends on January 2, 2019. The second semester of Wednesday Sessions begins on January 9, 2019 and ends on March 27, 2019. Curriculum Development Focus Groups: (Per Session Rate with Fringe Benefits = $60.65/hr) Focus groups to research and discuss differentiation and scaffolding for ELLS of various grade and proficiency levels Friday 10/5/18 for 2 hours Total for 3 teachers = $363.90 Focus group for to enhance content area vocabulary instruction through the usage of STEM kits Friday 10/12/18 for 2 hours Total for 3 teachers = $363.90 Focus groups to find differentiated resources that can be incorporated into the Title III Program 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount We need $1,182.68 for professional development Subtotal: $1,182.68 for parents Subtotal: $1,182.68 for PD Total: $2365.36 needed BUDGET: 20% of $12,366 = $2,473.20 We need = $2,663.10 Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Friday 11/15/18 for 1.25 hours Total for 3 teachers = $227.44 Focus group to research teaching academic vocabulary and reading fluency for ELLs Friday 12/14/18: 1.25 hours Total for 3 teachers = $227.44 December Parent Meeting 1 2 hours Total for 3 teachers = $363.90 December Parent Meeting 2 2 hours Total for 3 teachers = $363.90 January Parent Meeting 2 hours Total for 3 teachers = $363.90 Refreshments for parents $90.97 for all 3 meetings (each meeting: $30.32 for refreshments) Attanasio's Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT (Common Core-aligned) to be used during Title III After-School Sub-Total: $1,131.75 Pack of 5 Student Books = $98 1 Pack of 5 Student Books (Grade 3-5) = $98 x 3 = $294 2 Packs of 5 Student Books (Grades K-2) = $196 x 3 = $588 Teacher's Manual each: $49.95 5 Teacher's Manuals: $$249.75 Sets and books to be used during Title III After-School Literature/Trade books: $225 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Listening center books: $400 Reader's Theater: $400 Guided reading sets for lower level readers: $316.45 RAZ Kids from Learning A-Z: $189.90 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $12,306.46 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Carl Ullman School Borough Queens School Number 213 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Megan McCauley Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elfrida Yu Teacher/Subject Area Jacklyn Yang/ENL (.6) Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Jasmine Norris Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Natalie Culpeper Brown Coach type here School Counselor Irma Revello Parent Sun Young Kim Parent Coordinator Beth Revello-Wick Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2.6 1.6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 466 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.02%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? TCRWP is one assessment tool that our school uses to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. This assessment helps to determine the ELL students' alphabet recognition, phonemic awareness, concepts of print, and independent reading levels. It is given periodically throughout the year. Moreover, to assess writing skills, teachers use on-demands to create a baseline for each topic. The on-demand is used again as a summative assessment to monitor and track growth within the unit. The assessment can help determine whether or not the student has had exposure to literacy before entering our school. The data gathered in September is used as a baseline assessment. As the year progresses, the data collected guides instructional planning by allowing the teachers (classroom and ENL) to collaborate and develop more small group lessons that can help target the common struggles the students are currently encountering when reading. Additionally, based on this assessment, we have discovered that some Expanding level students need additional instruction in the areas of Reading and Writing; which we provide AIS/RTI Services on an as need basis. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, teachers utilize the data from the baseline assessments and running records to guide instruction. ENL students are placed in small groups and instructions are differentiated to foster their learning through the use of visuals, manipulatives, co-teaching methods and parallel teaching methods. ENL teachers push into the classroom and provide academic support to ELLs. Additionally, we have at-risk service providers and SETSS teacher (who will also provide at-risk services). These teachers also attend professional development through Teachers College to further support instructional planning for our ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use Envisions math assessments (benchmark, inventory) to determine the levels in math computation and problem-solving skills. Additionally, we administer monthly exemplars as tools in monitoring progress and areas of need. For Reading, we use Ready Gen tasks as summative assessments. Moreover, we administer Teachers College Running Records periodically and on an as-needed basis. To determine writing aptitude, we utilize Teachers College On-Demand writing (scored on a rubric) as benchmarks to track students' progress throughout the units. To evaluate the success of our program data is compiled and then reviewed noting patterns and trends. Additionally, ENL and classroom teachers utilize conference notes when analyzing data to aid in developing a plan to meet the areas of need for our ELLs. Since ENL teacher push-in for certain periods every week, it is crucial that they communicate with the classroom to ensure that the progress of ELLs are being monitored. Classroom teachers provide ENL teachers with TCRWP Assessment and Envisions data so trends can be analyzed and areas of need for ELLs can be identified. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once we have gathered the summative data, the rubrics are structured universally for On-Demand use so that we may use the same tool to collect and assess student work to track their growth. Additionally, this information is then used during Grade Level Inquiry Team meetings to analyze the student data, reflect on their progress, and create plans to improve instructional effectiveness among the grade. ENL teachers are involved in these meetings as well. The ENL teachers will analyze the data using EDAT to look for ongoing and common trends. as a team, the ENL teachers and classroom teacher will formulate a plan; either a plan of action or professional development will be provided for teachers and students. Additionally, ENL teachers will work alongside classroom teachers to develop scaffolds and differentiated instructions to better meet the needs of the ELLs. Moreover, there are push-in educators in the building for additional support depending on the needs of the ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Instead of being reactive to providing ELLs with intervention services, we are proactive. We use the three tiered RTI model to provide high-quality instruction for ELLs according to their needs. The learning rate of each individual student is monitored in order to make important educational decisions. There are three tiers of instructional support. Tier I provides a rigorous and evidence-based core curriculum, including language development for ELLs. At this tier, all students are provided with explicit instructions. This consists of instructions in areas such as phonological awareness, letter- sound correspondence, fluency, vocabulary development, and comprehension. ENL teacher provides students with the structure and opportunities to practice English. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to provide supporting learning environments to foster learning and engage students. ENL teachers push into classrooms and provide small group instructions on a needed basis. It is crucial that we provide students with rigorous academic content and opportunities to build their linguistic repertoire through turn and talk, accountable talk, group work throughout the school day. It is of utmost importance that we incorporate language skills in all content areas in order to help boost academic talk and language. our goal is to help build their linguistic repertoire to participate in class through the practice of language skills. 2018-19 CEP 59  If it is found through assessments given that an ELL is flagged as at-risk or below benchmark on any particular skill or competency, the team will provide Tier II intensive targeted instruction in areas of need to bolster development in the competency area. The Tier II instruction is provided in addition to the Core Curriculum. Tier II instruction can be provided by a pedagogue, such as a service provider or by the classroom teacher during small-group instruction. The Tier II instruction will be provided for a time determined by the PPC/RtI Team. All the while, progress monitoring will inform if the child is in need of services for a longer period of time or more intensive services (Tier III), or if the services are adequate or should be discontinued. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The trend has been that most students become proficient in English by the end of Kindergarten through second grade. In regards to language development, students will first become proficient in listening and speaking before they become proficient in reading and writing. In Kindergarten, the students tend to fall into the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning levels. By the end of the 1st grade, and after two years of ENL instruction, most children are scoring at the Expanding level or Commanding level. Moving through the upper grades, the numbers of the Entering/Emerging tend to be accounted for by new arrivals. An overall pattern for all grades is that, for the most part, students move up through proficiency levels at an expected rate. To better inform ELL programs, our school uses EDAT to configure our assessments data to help evaluate our current ENL program. We run the School Summary Report to monitor the students in all content areas. Additionally, the NYSESLAT Analysis Report is utilized to track and record the progress made by ELLs in the current school year. Moreover, the NYSESLAT and Years of Service & the NYSESLAT and ELA Comparison Report have been used to determine whether or not the student is still entitled to ELL services. These data reports are all then analyzed by the ENL team to help determine the course of action for the ELL programs for the following school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The EDAT and RLAT from ATS are shared with all teachers on staff to help raise their awareness of the at-risk levels, attendance, long-term ELLs, SIFE status, state exam results, as well as the progression on the NYSESLAT of our current students. There are Grade Level Inquiry Teams that meet to plan how to close the gap between the level the students are performing at and where they are projected to be in order to achieve grade level standards. Educators attend professional development to become proficient in understanding the assessments that are administered and how to utilize them to drive ELL programming and instructions. Additionally, the LAP team meets to adjust the ENL program to better suit our students' needs. Moreover, our school provides a Title III After School Program to incorporate strategies that help students close the aforementioned gap so students are able to fully participate in all classroom activities. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs at P.S. 213 are programmed heterogeneously. As much as possible, each grade is serviced on its own, but when needed, for scheduling reasons, two contiguous grades may be combined (as per amended CR Part 154.2 mandates). Integrated ENL, is an ENL delivery model in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two 2018-19 CEP 60  certified teachers. Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL At the elementary level, ENL can be delivered in the following 3 ways: A. A push in model: an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. B. A pull-out model: ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL teachers need to plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. C. A self-contained model: ELLs are grouped together in an ENL class, usually for the entire school day and for all content instruction. When possible, an ENL teacher will push into a classroom during the literacy block to scaffold ELA so that comprehension is maximized. Based on the individual NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing data, students are given a proficiency level. That level will be used to determine the allotted mandated minutes that child will receive. Entering and Emerging level students will receive 360 minutes of ENL (180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL). Transitioning level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL, 90 minutes of either Integrated ENL or Stand Alone ENL). Expanding level students will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Commanding level students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL as per the CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs at P.S. 213 are programmed heterogeneously. As much as possible, each grade is serviced on its own, but when needed, for scheduling reasons, two contiguous grades may be combined (as per amended CR Part 154.2 mandates). ELLs are required to receive all or part of their ENL through an integrated model, which refers to a unit of study or its equivalent in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction. The integrated ENL along with a subject area taught are dependent upon the student’s proficiency level. In grades K to 8, at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided; at the expanding level, the integrated ENL is with any content area that best meets the needs of the student. Entering-level students must receive a total of 360 minutes (Eight 45-minute periods) of ENL instruction, with 180 minutes (4 periods) as standalone (which is in a pull-out model in our school) and 180 minutes (4 periods) as integrated ENL. Integrated means that either Ms. Yu or our new part-time ENL teacher, Ms. Yang, teachers that are dually-certified in ENL and Common Branch, pushes in and co-teaches with the classroom teacher or she pulls them out and services students in both ENL and ELA. Emerging-level students must receive a total of 360 minutes (8 periods) of ENL instruction, with a minimum of 90 (2 periods) minutes as standalone and a minimum of 180 (4 periods) minutes of integrated ENL and ELA, and a choice of 90 minutes (2 periods) as either standalone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA/content area. Transitioning-level students must receive a total of 180 minutes (4 periods) of ENL instruction, with a minimum of 90 minutes (2 periods) as integrated and a choice of 90 minutes (2 periods) of standalone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA/content area. 2018-19 CEP 61  Expanding-level students must receive a total of 180 minutes (4 periods) of ENL instruction, and all 180 minutes must be integrated ENL/ELA/content area. Commanding-level students receive 90 minutes (2 periods) of integrated ENL/ELA/content area as well as ELL testing accommodations for two years after testing out of the NYSESLAT. In the ENL program model, home language support is provided through the use of bilingual dictionaries. We also provide bilingual books for our students to read in our ENL library in the classroom. Additionally, students will receive ELL testing accommodations in accordance with NYS CR Part 154.2. They are entitled to receive NYS Mathematics and NYS Science Assessments in their home language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school currently only offers the Freestanding English as a New Language program. In our ENL program, 1.6 ENL teachers provide instruction in English as part of the CR part 154.2 mandates for ELLs. In order to help foster ELLs language development and effectively meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in both the Push-In and Pull-Out model of ENL, teachers diagnose each student instructionally, adjusting Bilingual peer-tutors /partners to help with the learning of vocabulary and speaking skills. ENL strategies and instruction are provided accordingly and student progress is closely monitored. The strategies that are utilized are small group instruction, strategy group instruction, Total Physical Response, visual aids, sentence and question frames, and turn and talk. Native language and prior knowledge are used as a reference for learning English. For example, ELLs who are literate in their native language that shares cognates with English can apply native language vocabulary knowledge when reading in English; likewise, ELLs with high levels of schooling can often bring conceptual knowledge developed in their native language when reading in English. In order to achieve the standards for reading literature, writing, and research, language development and speaking and listening, we provide rigorous, grade-level expectations in the aforementioned areas to prepare all students to be college and career ready, including English language learners. They will also benefit from instruction about how to negotiate situations outside of those settings so they are able to participate on equal footing with everyone in their community in all aspects of social, economic, and civic endeavors. Our teachers build on the ELLs prior knowledge and academic instruction and give them additional time and appropriate instructional support. To help ELLs meet the high academic standards in language arts our students have access to teachers and personnel at the school level who are well prepared and qualified to support ELLs while taking advantage of the many strengths and skills they bring to the classroom. We provide a literacy-rich school environment where students are immersed in a variety of language experiences. We provide instruction that develops foundational skills in English and enables ELLs to participate fully in grade-level coursework; coursework that prepares ELLs for the expectations outlined in the CCLS, yet the coursework is made comprehensible for students learning content in a second language (through specific pedagogical techniques and additional resources). Opportunities are given in the classroom for discourse and interaction, such as the use of turn and talk during the literacy block, that is well-designed to enable ELLs to develop communicative strengths in language arts. Through our Vertical Data Inquiry Team, Grade Level Inquiry Team, ENL Team, and our PPC/RtI Team, we have on-going discourse in how to better help the ELLs, as well as, on-going progress monitoring in collaboration with the classroom teachers, the ENL teachers, and service providers. In the area of math, research shows that regular and active participation in the classroom — not only reading and listening but also discussing, explaining, writing, representing, and presenting — is critical to the success of ELLs in mathematics. Research has shown that ELLs can produce explanations, presentations, etc. and participate in classroom discussions as they are learning English. Instruction includes a focus on “mathematical discourse” and “academic language” because these are crucial for ELLs. Although it is critical that students who are learning English have opportunities to communicate mathematically, this is not primarily a matter of learning vocabulary. Students learn to participate in mathematical reasoning, not by learning vocabulary, but by making conjectures, presenting explanations, and/or constructing arguments-all which are a part of the CCLS. We also have a science teacher on staff that provides all the students with a rigorous curriculum. The ENL teacher provides content area support by reviewing lessons done in the classroom that focuses on vocabulary development and comprehension in all subject areas. As mentioned before, in order to provide the students with the demands of the CCLS, the PPC/RtI Committee meets monthly, as 2018-19 CEP 62  well as, on an at-need basis in order to discuss the needs of our ELLs and to provide additional services where needed. Our Standalone ENL program is aligned with the CCLS. In addition, we invite ELLs to participate in our Title III after-school program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We provide support for the home languages of our ELL population. Teachers, paraprofessionals, parents, and students who are able to speak another language aid in translating for our newcomers. Lessons are in English with key vocabulary words are provided in the students’ home language. Our ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and service providers are able to do this, using Promethean Board interactive programs and websites geared for ELLs. Our ENL classroom has bilingual dictionaries in the student's home language and other books about their country to promote acceptance of ELLs’ native language and culture. All letters going home to families are provided in their home language as well as in English. Our Parent Coordinator, Beth Revello-Wick, provides the parents with information on after-school programs for their children in their native language as well as in English. These programs support learning in all content areas. They also provide additional information for parents who are interested in taking classes in English. Additionally, for new Spanish-Speaking entrants, we would administer the Spanish LAB in order to determine language dominance. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) In accordance to CR Part 154, placement of SIFE students in mandatory standards-based ENL and content area classrooms is crucial. The ENL Team and PPC/RtI Team facilitate, in a timely manner, the placement of SIFE students. For those students who have a home language of Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, or Spanish, we administer the NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener. SIFE status is inputted in the DOE’s data collection systems no later than 30 days from the first day of enrollment in the BNDC screen. Schools have one year to make a determination on SIFE status, so the initial identification made within the first 30 days can be modified up to a year. When the student scores at a transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT, the SIFE status is removed. In addition, bilingual education instructional models, pursuant to CR Part 154.2, are considered. Determination of the literacy and numeracy skills of SIFE students is necessary. The students are given diagnostic tests in their native language and English for mathematics, reading, and writing. These tests are developed collaboratively through the efforts of the ENL Teacher, the classroom teachers, and service providers. The mathematics diagnostic reflects a range of competencies, beginning with basic skills, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. The literacy diagnostic is tiered in levels of difficulty in reading and offers options for oral and written responses in both the native language and in English. The assessment results, when coordinated with other information, derived during the intake process, assist in clarifying the needs of students. b) Newcomers: The primary objective is to simplify while amplifying the content. Students are provided with hands-on demonstrations, opportunities for role-playing, journal writing, using native language or visuals and also using the Reading and Writing Workshop model that uses balanced literacy approach with an emphasis on shared reading and writing. Our vocabulary program, “Elements of Reading-Vocabulary” is also utilized. Elements of Reading-Vocabulary use listening, speaking, reading, and writing activities. It has many strategies that teach new words and uses graphic organizers, and modeling using TPR (Total Physical Response), designed to increase their competencies. Additional strategies and activities used are journal writing, jazz chants, puppetry, interactive read-alouds, reader's theater, and story mapping. c) Plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years: For ELLs receiving service of 4-6 years, we utilize intensive, explicit vocabulary instruction, and intensive academic literacy skills building. The focus is on developing social and emotional support in the language acquisition process. This is in addition to all the other instructional services provided to all other ELLs. Our plan is to build on critical thinking skills and comprehension in subject areas, such as reading, math, social studies, and science. Instruction will continue to include basic skills in the context of higher thinking and problem-solving strategies and skills. d) Our current plan set in place for Long Term ELLs is to provide RTI/AIS services in the areas of reading and writing since we 2018-19 CEP 63  find that they are fluent in speaking but have difficulty in reading and writing. The ENL teacher will work in a small group setting to enhance Long-Term ELLs specific language needs. ENL scaffolds will be created to help Long-Term ELLs better comprehend context embedded vocabulary during literacy block in their classrooms. e) Plan for former ELLs (in years 1 and 2 after testing at the commanding level): Former ELLs, who reach Commanding level on the NYSESLAT, are serviced for 90 minutes (two 45-minute periods) each week and also maintain testing accommodations for two years after testing out. We also support language learning through the administration of authentic based assessments on multiple measures. Multiple measures include running records, writing rubrics and student work samples. When embedded in instruction these measures will provide classroom teachers with the appropriate information to plan purposeful instructions for these students. ENL teachers alongside classroom will continue to use scaffolding to support specific language needs. FELLs are also included, when suitable, in our Academic Intervention Services during the school day. Students are also invited to continue attending the Title III after school program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs: Our plan for ELL students with disabilities is to build on critical thinking and comprehension skills in all subject areas. The ENL teacher will work closely with the classroom teachers. The ENL teacher will look at each student’s IEP for recommended goals and strategies. The students are placed in heterogeneous groups according to their grade levels, where instruction is given in English. They are serviced in small groups. The ENL teacher uses visuals, manipulatives, and other ENL scaffolds and strategies. The ENL teacher utilizes Thinking Maps to build on prior knowledge and to scaffold information. Students are engaged in pre-reading vocabulary development activities to increase their understanding of new material being taught. The following materials are being utilized: Just Right Reading Program and Sundance Nonfiction Strategies Kit. Scaffolding techniques are used extensively with ELLs identified as having special needs. IEP mandates are taken into consideration when working with ELL-SWDs. Students are also grouped according to their goals and targeted instructional needs. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher have regularly scheduled articulation periods throughout the school year to discuss student progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 213 has ICT classes in grades K, 1, 2, and 5. This allows for 2 teachers that have the ability to attend to the specific goals of ELL-SWDs. Students are often streamed into other classrooms for subjects that they find challenging or for classes in which they excel. Teachers have been trained in Special Education strategies and ELL strategies to help ELL students with learning disabilities. Teachers have also received training that parallels the strategies used for SWD and ELLs. This training has allowed them to create lessons for all of their students (regardless of academic level or exceptionality) that are appropriate and engaging within the CCLS. The ENL teachers are also flexible with their schedules to ensure that the ELL-SWDs are serviced during times of when students are showing a higher rate of concentration. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers and related service providers which allow them to gain knowledge of the students' routines and a wide range of academic and language abilities and needs. Based on observed needs, ELL-SWDs work in small groups, partners, one-on-one with the teacher to ensure success. Supplemental materials and manipulatives or real-life objects may be given to these students for further scaffolding and support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order to meet the needs of all of the aforementioned ELL student subgroups, we have a PPC/RtI Committee set in place. We meet monthly, as well as, in an “as need” basis. Our service providers and all committee members have discussions with the teachers of the students receiving RtI services in order to assess additional services, length of services, and to ascertain how the ELL student is progressing. The targeted intervention program for ELLs in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science includes the ENL Inquiry Team, Vertical Data Inquiry Team, Grade Level Inquiry Teams, and the PPC/RtI Teams, that meet periodically to discuss specific needs of all students. Students in need for additional services are identified according to their New York State ELA, Math, and Grade 4 Science scores as well as teacher recommendations. Strategies are agreed upon to address to needs 2018-19 CEP 64  of the students. In all core content areas, ENL and classroom teachers build academic vocabulary for ELLs through rich non-fiction texts and the use of technology. Service providers and classroom teachers set clear goals that are adjusted on an ongoing basis across levels. Progress monitoring is a crucial component and the providers working with the students are in daily communication with the classroom teachers. We provide many opportunities for targeted intervention in all content areas. Some of the interventions available are targeted small group work, AIS programs, push in/pull out programs, and Enrichment Clusters. These interventions are conducted in English, however, students requiring native language assistance are provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in order to assist them with their translation needs. Our ELL students continue to receive interventions noted above even if they reach English proficiency. To further support, the ELLs in testing grades the school offers an after school program that focuses on ELA and Math test taking strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trends, the new programs and improvements for the upcoming year are as follows: 1) New PD hours: All teachers must receive a minimum of 15% of their PD hours on ELL professional development, while 50% of the PD hours for ENL and bilingual teachers must be related to ELL professional development. ENL teachers will encourage teachers to actively look and join them in Profession Learning opportunities offered by Queens North Field Support Center. 2) We will consider to purchasing Mondo and National Geographic materials, which focuses on expressive oral language as this is an area of need for our youngest ELLs (K and Grade 1). 3) We have and will continue to purchase additional bilingual dictionaries and books in various languages to provide the students with more extensive English language support through the use of home language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have targeted intervention programs for ELLs. They are grouped according to grade level. Instruction is differentiated according to proficiency and interest levels. In addition, ELLs are given the opportunity to receive additional services during the school day (if needed) and participate in the Title III after school program all year. Our All students, including ELLs, are afforded equal access to all school programs by written notices that go home to the parents/guardians offering all programs provided by the school. Our school has targeted intervention programs for ELLs, specifically the Title III after-school. All ELLs are invited to the Title III after-school programs, where they receive additional linguistic support through the practice of auditory and oral language skills (ex: Reader's Theater). Additionally, all students, including ELLs, are invited to the self-sustaining after-school program where they receive assistance in completing homework and opportunities the socialize with their peers. During this after-school program, students choose from various extracurricular activities, such as sports, technology, music, theater, and art programs. Moreover, we invite all students, including ELLs, in grades 3 through 5 to an after-school NYS ELA and Math test prep to prepare them for the upcoming exams. This after-school provides all students will additional support relating to the standardized exams. ELLs are given bilingual dictionaries to help them prepare for and take the test. In addition, one day per week, for eight weeks in the Fall semester and eight weeks in the Spring semester, the students have the opportunity to participate in the school-wide Enrichment for All Program. The choices of which Enrichment Cluster to join is made by each student. The choices range from recycling materials, horticulture, and making items to sell in order to raise money for charity. The school invites all ELLs to participate by sending letters home. ELLs are able to fully participate with the help of peer translators or with the assistance of staff members who can translate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every classroom has a diverse library with a large selection of fiction and non-fiction books. The materials we use in our program are aligned to the CCLS and many have a technology component to provide audio and visual aids. To access the technology components, each classroom is equipped with a Promethean Board. In the classrooms, we are currently using Ready Gen Reading program and Teacher's College Writing Workshop. This year in Math, all classrooms are using Envisions Math Program. In Technology, our students have access to Kid Pix, Kidspiration, code.org, starfall.com, uniteforliteracy.com and abcya.com. Other supplemental ENL materials we use to support our ELLs are Listen and Learn Word Family Phonics 2018-19 CEP 65  Activity to support English input, and Mondo's Let's Talk About It program which focuses on developing Oral skills. We also have various audiobooks alongside its print version to support ELLs in our listening center. Moreover, we have purchased RAZkids accounts to provide ELLs with more at level books with incentives to read. Lastly, we have sets of National Geographic books in our ENL library to help with Content Area Instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At our school, we currently only offer the freestanding ENL program. We provide support for each ELL students’ home language through the following: using bilingual staff members, parents, and students, to help in the translation for our newcomer ELLs and bilingual dictionaries. As our school is beginning to have a growing number of ELLs who speak Chinese as their home language, one of the Chinese speaking ENL teachers can assess a newcomer ELL's reading and writing skills in Chinese in order to plan for effective literacy development. By ascertaining that the student is fluent and literate is his/her home language, the ENL teacher can help transfer those literacy skills. Language experience lessons are in English with key vocabulary words written in the student’s language. Our ENL teachers and service providers are able to use ENL websites which are interactive on the Promethean Board located in all classrooms. Our ENL classroom has bilingual dictionaries and books in the students’ native languages and other books about their countries are available to promote acceptance of the native languages and cultures of all ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Beth Revello-Wick, is also available with translators at the beginning of the school year to assist with newcomers. All correspondence to parents is provided in their home language as well as in English. We also have implemented the International Festival every year celebrating the many cultures within our school community. These programs offer support socially, emotionally, and academically. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Following the Common Core Curriculum ensures that all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. We have Grade-Level Inquiry Teams and PPC/RtI teams that meet on a regular basis to analyze all student data (including ELLs) to determine what services/resources are needed to support all of our students. There are also several targeted intervention programs for ELLs. They are grouped according to their grade levels. Instruction is differentiated according to their ENL proficiency levels and interests. Formal and informal assessments are administered in order to determine the need for each student. There is communication between the ENL teachers, classroom teachers, service providers, and PPC/RTI Team to determine the placement of our ELLs in our targeted intervention program and to plan for differentiated instruction for all of our ELLs. Students who are ELLs and ELLs-SWDs are given grade- and age-appropriate work that engages them cognitively. For example, even if a student needs support in more basic skills, the content that is used for the delivery of instruction is grade- and age-appropriate so that the CCLS can be met and the student can maintain a high level of interest as well as continue to be cognitively engaged and challenged. Moreover, to ensure that all students receive services that are grade and age appropriate, service providers push-in to classrooms to teach alongside the classroom teacher. Additionally, when service providers are unable to push-in to classrooms, they pull out groups of students that are in the same grade. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does share building space with P4 Queens. Currently, staff members from P4 coordinate with PS213's STEAM Team to create rigorous STEAM activities. Through this collaboration, Special Education teachers and ENL teachers work together to develop scaffolds needed to support such activities. Additionally, our school coordinates with P4 on a Gardening Club. One staff member from each school meets periodically to plan and share resources for the club. All students are invited to join with parental consent. Students in the club are encouraged to work together to build social skills and language skills through teamwork. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 213Q provides a variety of activities to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year. During pre-registration of incoming students for kindergarten, ENL teachers, and key school staff facilitate a smooth registration process for those students. Translators and bilingual staff are available to assist families when needed. ENL teachers will make sure that the home language survey is completed accurately. Students are interviewed alongside their parents during this process. When new incoming students are enrolled and are determined to be ELLs, the students are provided with all the ENL services 2018-19 CEP 66  during the day that they are eligible for and are invited to join in the Title III after-school program. They are also invited to join other after-school programs going on in the school on days when Title III after-school does not take place. The guidance counselor meets with all new admits and with the help of an interpreter to better know the student. The parent coordinator introduces herself to the parents and they are invited to PTA meetings as well as given opportunities to join. Parents are encouraged to volunteer for various events inside and outside of school regardless of English proficiency. Students and parents of ELLs are invited to everything all other students and parents partake in so that every effort can be made by the school to acclimate these individuals to their new school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL Coordinator will provide all staff members (including the school guidance counselor, subject area teachers, the school psychologist, OT, PT and speech teachers, secretaries and parent coordinators) with high-quality ELL-related professional development every other month during a Monday PD session, turn-keying valuable information from PDs the ENL Coordinator attends, such as the professional learning opportunities offered by Queens North Borough Field Support Center. The tentative Professional Learning Opportunities ENL Teachers will attend and turnkey are as follows: ELL Liaison Meetings in District 26 ELL Data Analysis Tool Training Strategic Formative Assessment of ELLs K-5 New NYSITELL Training NYSESLAT Training TCRWP Saturday Reunion Title III Planning Workshop In five years, school staff will receive more than 15% of their mandated 175 PD hours in ELL-related content. Where staff members are not able to make it, a makeup session will be offered on Tuesdays during the professional work time. In addition, with Title III funds, part of the budget goes towards high-quality professional development that is of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms. Professional development hours can be done through in-person training and meetings as well as through online learning. Videos can be found on the ELL Educator Resources page at http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/default.htm. The Queens North Field Support Center also provides training and professional development for teachers. Monday PD days are built to support teacher learning through turnkey meetings as well as bringing in experts from outside the building. 2018-19 CEP 67  Due to the new Teachers College (TC) writing curriculum that was introduced in our school during the 2016-2017 school year, the ENL teachers plan on attending TC professional developments offered in the following year to better provide integrated instructions and create appropriate scaffolds for the ELLs. These PDs support teachers in delivering Common Core-aligned instruction by using the reading, writing, listening and speaking standards of the CCLS to lesson plan and deliver rigorous instruction that pushes ELLs to succeed in being college and career ready. For example, teaching ELLs on academic language and to have meaningful discussions in which they cite text evidence, are some of the standards they will reach after the ENL Teacher attends these PDs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and ENL teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Our school has a professional development plan for all ELL personnel. ENL teachers and related service providers attend workshops and professional learning opportunities offered by either Queens North Field Support Center or Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Classroom teachers and other staff members are encouraged to attend these workshops as well alongside ENL teachers. However, it is not a requirement as ENL teachers would turnkey the staff every other month during Monday Staff Development. For each PD, agendas are distributed and sign-in sheets are passed around for attendance purposes. Additionally, for the workshops teachers attend, they maintain their own records, and certificates and agendas are kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Schools must provide parents annual and individual meetings to discuss their child's progress in addition to already existing meetings. Tuesday Parent Engagement times may be used to meet with parents individually. One meeting must be had between teacher and parent for all students, exclusive of Parent-Teacher Conferences and Meet the Teacher Nights. Logs and sign-ins are maintained. Phone and email conferences are acceptable as long as there is a record kept of the content of the meeting. Follow-up calls for Parent Teacher Conferences are acceptable as well. The interpretation line may be used or budget for the Translation and Interpretation may be used for in-person interpreters. The Translation Unit may be utilized to translate forms and slips that parents need in their home language. The ENL Teacher will inform parents by a letter home in both English and in the students’ native language that they can set up a time to meet with the ENL Teacher. Parents can choose a time that works for them (on a Tuesday or after school on another day) and a mode of meeting (face-to-face, email, phone call with an interpreter, etc.). After the first parent-teacher conference in November, the letter will go out so that the individual meeting can be a follow-up. There are 56 ENL students (as of September 2017) so there will need to be 56 different meetings that will need to be set up. Once all the responses are received, parents will receive a letter and a phone call in English and their home language to confirm the date, time, and location of the meeting. During these individual meetings, ENL teachers will discuss ENL program goals, child's language development progress, language proficiency results and language development needs in all content areas. Parents are entitled to receive such information in their home language. To aid this, the Translation and Interpretation hotline may be used to help translate the 2018-19 CEP 68  meeting. Additionally, ENL teachers may invite the classroom teacher to the meeting to show parents additional data in all content areas regarding their child and the efforts that we have planned to help their child meet grade level needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are involved in school activities. Our Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Beth Revello-Wick, will be giving parent workshops. She provides parents with information on adult ENL Programs being offered locally. She coordinates with the Parent-Teacher Association and School Leadership Team, to organize the International Festival. Our Parent Coordinator and members of our Parent-Teacher Association, reach out to new incoming parents to our school community. In addition, Mrs. Kim and Ms. Yu, the ENL teachers, will be giving workshops and informational sessions for parents on how to help their children succeed academically and linguistically. Many parents assist in communication with the newcomers and encourage them to become involved in school activities. We have an annual International Festival where all ethnicities are represented and celebrated. Here families are able to share aspects of their culture with the entire school community. Parents and students are involved in preparing food, art activities, music, and dance performances of all cultures represented at P.S. 213. We have Bilingual teachers on staff. These teachers are available during the school day and assist in translation at workshops and meetings. We also utilize the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate letters, PowerPoint Presentations, and notices that are sent home. Data is collected and analyzed from the school survey with regard to parent needs. This data is then used to inform and guide future workshops and facilitates in the home-school connection. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Megan McCauley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 213 School DBN: 26Q213 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Megan McCauley Title Principal Natalie Culpeper-Brown Assistant Principal Beth Revello-Wick Parent Coordinator Elfrida Yu ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sun Young Kim Parent Jacklyn Yang/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Irma Revello School Counselor Jasmine Norris Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/20/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/20/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q213 School Name: The Carl Ullman School Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elfrida Carolyn Yu Cohen ENL Teacher Secretary No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration, parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). The last two questions ask parents in what language do they prefer written and oral communication with the school. The results of those two questions are inputted by the secretary who registers the students. The RAPL screen on ATS collects this data and is available for viewing/printing. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 72  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Korean Spanish Urdu Punjabi Turkish Bihari Pashko Arabic Kpelle Mandarin 501 118 78 8 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 70.17% 16.53% 10.92% 1.12% 0.42% 0.28% 0.28% 0.14% 0.14% 0% 0% 0% 505 105 74 9 4 2 2 1 1 1 1 9 70.73% 14.71% 10.36% 1.26% 0.56% 0.28% 0.28% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 1.26% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 73  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. ELL Parent Letters: - Continued Entitlement September - Non-Entitlement after NYSESLAT - Entitlement September - Non-Entitlement after NYSITELL September - Parent Brochures to ENL students September - Placement Letters September - Default Placement Letters - NYSESLAT Parent Guides -Parent Orientation Invitations -Title III Parent Invitations September September March All ELL Mandated Notification letters are presently available on the DOE intranet in the parents' preferred languages. The ELL Parent Brochures are also presently available on the DOE website under Office and Programs: English Language Learners. The NYSESLAT parent guides are presently available in the parents preferred languages on the NYSED website under Bilingual Education and English As A New Language. The ENL teachers access the RAPL report from ATS and print out copies of letters, brochures, and NYSESLAT parent guides in the parents' preferred languages. 2018-19 CEP 74  September October Parent- Teacher Conference Invitation September, November, March, May State Testing Parent Information Workshop March These letters are translated by bilingual staff members at the school. We currently have them in the top 3 most requested home languages within the school demographic. However, if the letters are requested in a language outside the top 3, we will send the letters over to the translation and interpretation unit. These letters are translated by bilingual staff members at the school. We currently have them in the top 3 most requested home languages within the school demographic. However, if the letters are requested in a language outside the top 3, we will send the letters over to the translation and interpretation unit. These letters are translated by bilingual staff members at the school. We currently have them in the top 3 most requested home languages within the school demographic. However, if the letters are requested in a language outside the top 3, we will send the letters over to the translation and interpretation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conference September, November, March, May interpretation service(s)? Our school utilizes bilingual staff who are able to communicate and efficiently provide translations to effectively conduct meetings between parents and teachers. In previous years, when there has been an influx of teachers requesting translation services, our school has hired an interpreter for the night of the conference. However, if neither interpreter or bilingual staff member is available, our school will use the 2018-19 CEP 75  IEP Meetings Throughout School Year ENL Parent Workshops December, March Tuesday Parent Engagement Time Throughout the school year Translation and Interpretation Unit's hotline. When parents request a translation, a bilingual staff member is approached to help interpret the meeting. However, if there aren't any bilingual staff members available, the Translation and Interpretation Unit's hotline is then utilized. Workshops will be led in multiple by the use of bilingual staff members. If a language requested is not spoken by a staff member, the ENL Team will request to hire an interpreter for a workshop. When parents request a translation at these meetings, a bilingual staff member is approached to help interpret. However, if there aren't any bilingual staff members available, the Translation and Interpretation Unit's hotline is then utilized. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's communication strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency will be to utilize bilingual staff members who speak the top three languages in our school building as well as using the Translation and Interpretation Unit's hotline. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members were made aware of the goal of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during Chancellor’s Conference Day for staff development. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will make limited-English Proficient parents aware of their right to receive information in their preferred languages by posting a welcome poster by the security desk, distributing the Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access to all parents whose primary language is a covered language and require language assistance services , and to provide the Language ID Guide at the security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Letters home and signs in the main office as well as at the security desk will ensure that parents are notified of their options and rights, as well as the phone number to the interpretation hotline. Materials sent to the school by the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be distributed to the students to take home. The school can also hold a focus group for parents inclusive of all cultures and languages to be represented in our school community to gather feedback on services and to share best practices that they see happening in the school. 2018-19 CEP 77 
