2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q222 School Name: P.S. Q222 - FIRE FIGHTER CHRISTOPHER A. SANTORA SCHOOL Principal: YVONNE MARRERO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: FF Christopher A. Santora School 343000010222 Pre-K to 2 School Number (DBN): 30Q222 86-15 37 th Avenue, Jackson Heights, NY 11372 718-429-2563 718-429-3484 Phone Number: Fax: Yvonne Marrero ymarrero@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Yvonne Marrero Patricia Santora Shannon Matlovsky Renee Spence JafetBarrera N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number:  718-391-8222 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yvonne Marrero Patricia Santora Shannon Matlovsky Laura Martinez JafetBarrera n/a n/a n/a Alexandra Felix Renee Spence *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Paraprofessional Katie Musselwhite-Goldsmith Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  LailaWilliams MitaDas Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P.S. 222Q, we are a highly professional and dedicated staff committed to creating a school community of independent thinkers with a love of learning. Our goal is to challenge our students in a safe and nurturing early childhood environment to meet their full academic potential as well as their social and emotional growth through continued guidance and monitoring, including varied strategies and supportive measures. Our motto is “Inspiring Greatness, One Child At A Time…” 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 222Q opened its doors on September 7, 2002. Since that time it has developed into one of the most extraordinary places of early childhood learning in the entire city of New York. Its setting is also exceptional. The school’s design was inspired by the existing architecture of the Jackson Heights Historic District and seamlessly blends into the area. It has a library/media center, a multipurpose room and an outside playground on the second floor. The student population reflects the “melting pot” of Queens with a representation of a number of ethnic cultures. Our student population is comprised of approximately 300 students of which close to 30% are English language learners (ELLs) and 8% are students with special needs. The principal and staff members take great pride in P.S. 222Q family’s distinct spirit of cooperation and collaboration. It is this spirit that enables all the school’s constituencies to move forward to achieve their clearly delineated educational goals and objectives which benefit the entire school community. The school’s mission’s goal is to challenge their students in a safe and nurturing early childhood environment to meet their full academic potential as well as their social and emotional growth through guidance and monitoring, including varied strategies and supportive measures. The highly professional staff of the school has set high expectations aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards of New York State that apply to all of their students in order for them to achieve academically as well as for them to attain a sense of self-worth and respect for all others. The principal and staff members ardently accept the responsibility to build on the strengths, needs and interests of each child and to fulfill their school motto - “Inspiring Greatness, One Child At A Time…” Some of our strategic collaborations and partnerships include Studio in a School, Renaissance Learning, Inside Broadway and UFT Teacher Center. Studio in a School helps our students build foundational art skills and develop 21st century skills of communication and problem solving. Renaissance Learning offers educational software to improve student learning in reading. Through our participation in the Cultural After School Adventures Program (CASA), we have been able to partner with Inside Broadway in order for our students to learn the skills that are required to perform in a show. In association with the UFT Teacher Center, we are able to tap into the myriad of resources and professional learning opportunities to enhance teaching practices. Highlighted below are some of our promising practices and programs that enhance the educational experience of our students.  Character Education — Principal’s Book of the Month is instituted in connection with our Character Education Program for grades K-2. We have identified a set of 8 books for the K-2 grade band. A school wide discussion around Principal’s Book of the Month sends a strong message to students that reading is important and that their thoughts around literature should be heard and celebrated. Furthermore, by incorporating character education, we teach our students the universal values that build character which produces behavior that is beneficial for the individual, others, and the community.  Music, Theatre and Visual Arts — Our Art Program offers music, theatre, and visual arts for all students K-2 with our teaching staff implementing the Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts, a standards-based, rigorous approach to teaching the arts. Instructional materials used in conjunction with our music program include Silver Burdett’s Making Music. For theatre, we use Houghton Mifflin Harcourt’s Readers’ Theatre Program for grades 1 and 2. In addition, we have a school chorus, concerts and performances throughout the year. Furthermore, for the seventh consecutive year, through our partnership with Studio-in-a-School, a resident artist works with first grade teachers in a project called First Grade Artists. In this program, first graders explore the visual world that surrounds them through a variety of media including collage, printmaking, paint, clay and puppetry, and are inspired by the works of other artists, including book illustrators. The use of reading, writing and class discussion deepen the art experiences while supporting literacy learning. In December our first graders will continue the already established tradition of performing “Festival of Folktales” and in the Spring our second graders will be performing “Peter Pan Junior.” 2018-19 CEP 10   Physical Education — Students K-2 receive physical education in keeping with the mandates. We implement the SPARK Program in grades K-2. This program includes 10 dynamic instructional units and each curricular component is presented in scope and sequence via daily lesson plans that are aligned to NASPE National Standards. The SPARK K-2 curriculum also contains academic integration tips (with a special emphasis on literacy), social skills themes by grade level, and challenging extensions for each activity.   Dual Language Program — The Dual Language Program at P.S. 222Q uses the 50/50 alternate day model for instruction. The English Language Learners and the Native English Speakers work cooperatively and serve as language role models for each other. Students spend one full day of instruction in English including reading, writing, math, science and social studies, and receive a full day of instruction in Spanish with a similar sequential pattern the following day. Throughout the program, both English Language Learners and Native English Speakers are held to the same high academic standards and assessments Schoolwide Enrichment (SEM) — Our SEM Program is a research supported instructional model of education that incorporates a wide variety of differentiated strategies, educational structures, and components that benefit all types of learners. Students have the liberty of choosing their own research theme/topic and work with a small cohort of students with similar interests. SEM is offered in cycles of 10 weeks per grade starting with second grade as an After School Program on Fridays from 2:30 – 3:45 PM. Library – A part-time librarian offers services to our children in the use of our library and media center. The library has been has been renovated into a state-of-the-art facility with a Promethean board, six I-macs, a color printer and an automated system of books to facilitate circulation. Classes are scheduled to visit the library on a regular basis.  We hold a number of special events: 9/11 Commemorative Walk; Family Fun Nights celebrating the work in content-area study, i.e. Literacy, Math, Physical Education; Character Hat/Halloween Day Parade; Read Aloud/Pajama Day; Science Fair; Earth Day Parade; Music Concerts; Theatrical Performances; Art Galleries. Our 9/11 Commemorative Walk is dear to our hearts as our school is named after FF Christopher A. Santora who perished on 9/11. On the day of the walk, our students hold an American flag and wear a firefighter’s hat and Christopher’s t-shirt. It is a solemn day imbued with the spirit of hope, courage, and resiliency—the American way! Our school community has agreed that our challenges include: limited space – we have a multipurpose room which serves as our cafeteria, gymnasium, auditorium and assembly hall; therefore, it poses limitations on the schedule. Participation of parents in content-focused workshops – while parents voice a need for content-focused workshops throughout the year, attendance at these workshops is at a minimum when compared to attendance at other “more enjoyable” events that involve the whole family. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The needs of our ELLs are home language support within the Dual Language setting as well as ENL in which content and language are taught simultaneously. With respect to our students with IEPs, we have flexible programming in order to service the students in the least restrictive environment. Supports include SETSS, ICT, and a range of services, i.e. occupational therapy, speech, counseling and adaptive physical education. Additionally, an After School Program provides supplemental support tailored to the linguistic needs of our ELLs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the 2017-2018 school year, our greatest area of growth was in implementing the Advanced Literacy Skills Framework to reading and writing instruction so that our students can become independent life-long readers and writers proficient in 21st Century Skills in alignment with the elements of Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. Our teachers provided our students with differentiated and standards-aligned 2018-19 CEP 11  cohesive instruction with scaffolds and supports; engaged them in high quality, varied texts with opportunities for authentic discussion; provided them with explicit vocabulary instruction in order to build their content knowledge and expand language; ensured that they wrote across all content areas and genres; and helped develop 21st Century Skills of collaboration, digital literacy, creativity, critical thinking and problem solving. Our key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year include to revise our curriculum maps in order to ensure that we strategically integrate the instructional shifts into our lessons as well as track student performance in order to determine the effectiveness of our scaffolds and supports. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q222 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 281 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 9 9 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 11 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 70.8% % Reduced Lunch 24.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.3% 69.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 11 92.8% 5.7% 10.7% 1.1% 13.9% 5.3% 2 0% 6.5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. TCRWP Running Records administered in June 2018 for the purposes of MoSL (Measures of Student Learning) revealed that 69.36% of Kindergarteners, 77.03% of First Graders and 80.31% of Second Graders are meeting grade level proficiency. The most notable increase was in First Grade with an overall year-end increase of 24 percentage points, from 53% at the beginning of the year in September 20`17 to 77% at the end of the year in June 2018. Additionally, there was a notable increase in Second Grade with the percentage of students exceeding reading benchmarks nearly doubling from 35.38% to 66.67% in one year. We attribute this increase to the changes we made as it relates to reading instruction and, more specifically, the provision of guided reading 3x a week across grades K-2. By scheduling three periods a week and grouping the students after every quarter, we ensured that everyone received explicit instruction at their instructional level. The Quality Review conducted in May 2018 stated that, "Review of unit plans and lesson plans across grades and content areas reveals alignment with the Common Core and integration of the instructional shifts (text-based answers and academic vocabulary) in numerous English Language Arts (ELA) curricular documents such as grade-one and grade-two unit plans but not in others." Additionally, it stated that, "While curricula and academic tasks are planned to support students with disabilities and ELLs, the instructional supports do not consistently provide all students, including the highest achieving students, access to cognitively engaging tasks." Therefore, our priority need is to strategically integrate the instructional shifts of text-based answers and academic vocabulary in our unit plans across the content areas of ELA, social studies and science, as well as ensure that scaffolds, supports and extensions allow all students to complete cognitively engaging tasks at the appropriate level of challenge. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have strategically integrated two literacy instructional shifts #4 (Text-based Answers) and #6 (Academic Vocabulary) across all ELA, Social Studies and Science units as well as have articulated scaffolds, supports and extensions in their lessons so as to cognitively engage all students in rigorous tasks resulting in 80% of students in grades K-2 meeting grade level proficiency as measured by the TCRWP Running Records and Informational Post On-Demand Student Writing Pieces. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Students' natural curiosity will be fostered by challenging them with worthy and rigorous tasks. Rigorous tasks include building knowledge through content-rich nonfiction, reading and writing with evidence and regular practice with complex text to engage students in meaningful work. These strategies are designed to target struggling students, including ELLs and SWDs. ● Professional development will be provided to support staff to leverage the instructional shifts of the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) to engage students in meaningful work. Collaborative planning time will be scheduled on Mondays during the 80-minute block for professional learning to develop lesson plans and materials, and to analyze data in order to embed effective strategies. Students K-2 9/18 – 6/19 Teachers, Literacy Coach Tier 1 Teachers and Paras 9/17,9/24, 10/1,10/15,10/22,10/29, 11/5,11/19,11/26, Principal, AP, SDC, Literacy Coach 12/3,12/10,12/17, 1/7,1/14,1/28, 2/4,2/11,2/25, 3/4,3/11,3/18,3/25, 4/1,4/8,4/15,4/29, 5/7,5/13,5/20 11/28,2/27,5/17 Parent Coordinator ● Parent workshops will be provided three times a year, once every marking period, to develop awareness of strategies to support deep understanding beyond getting the answer correct at home. All parents Tier 1 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold a Meet the Teacher in September 2018 to explain our Common Core-aligned instructional programs and to share strategies that they can implement with their children at home. Our classroom teachers will be responsible for implementation and administration for oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Literacy Coach, teachers, paraprofessionals, SDC (Staff Development Committee) members, Transformational Literacy book, prep schedule, schedule adjustments, teacher per session and per diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018, 80% of Grade 1 students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the First Grade Rubric for Informational Writing. By October 2018, 80% of Kindergarten students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Kindergarten Rubric for Informational Writing. By November 2018, 20% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By January 2019, 60% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By March 2019, 70% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By April 2019, 80% of Grade 2 students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Second Grade Rubric for Informational Writing. By June 2019, 80% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TC Running Records of Literacy, Gradewide Rubric for Informational Writing Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data gathered in the NYC School Survey relative to Social Emotional Supports indicated that while 83% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities, 22% of teachers said that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. Root causes identified included the availability of appropriate social-emotional programs at the early childhood level. Therefore, our priority need is to adopt the Sanford Harmony Program, a social emotional program which is at no cost to the school, in order to empower our students to learn relationship skills that promote self-confidence and respect; work cooperatively and collaboratively with others; develop an increased sense of connection with their peers; learn to appreciate similarities and differences; develop positive conflict resolution strategies that will last a lifetime; and help to reduce stereotyping, teasing, harassment and bullying. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 222Q will have implemented Sanford Harmony, a social emotional learning program, cultivating strong relationships between elementary students, by helping them learn to communicate effectively, build healthy peer relationships, positively resolve conflicts, embrace diversity and engage in global citizenship skills, resulting in 100% of students in grades K-2 showing measurable increases in achievement, empathy and other positive student behaviors as measured by the Sanford Harmony rubric. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be provided to support teachers with the implementation of the Sanford Harmony Program, a social emotional learning program designed for students in grades Pre-K through 2. Two specific activities that will be presented include: (1) Meet Up which is a forum where students gather to build a supportive learning community where all students feel connected and valued in their classroom by establishing and monitoring classroom goals, exchanging experiences and ideas and solving problems collaboratively; and (2) Buddy Up which is a peer buddy system that intentionally creates opportunities for diverse students to get to know one another and form connections that promote understanding commonalities and embracing differences, empathy and understanding, kindness and support, collaborative problem solving and confidence in expression. During the advisory period on Mondays, teachers will present strategies to improve student cooperation, collaboration and problem solving and promote harmonious peer-to-peer relationships. Parent communication will be shared throughout the course of the year to provide them with an overview of the specific lessons that are being taught in the classroom and strategies to support their children at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration and Coaches Teachers Program Overview on 9/4; 1:1 Coaching throughout the year, as needed Students Ongoing Teachers Parents 10/24,1/30,4/17 Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive letters detailing some of the topics and scenarios that students have discussed in the classroom and activities that they themselves can do at home to continue to reinforce the new learning. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight include the Assistant Principal and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, SDC (Staff Development Committee) members, prep schedule, schedule adjustments, teacher per session and per diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers would have implemented half of the program (11 lessons). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sanford Harmony Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Quality Review conducted in May 2018, teachers use student-friendly rubrics and checklists with the school's curricula. However, written feedback is actionable but not meaningful. Root causes include limited planning time on Mondays and Tuesdays after school. Our priority need is to institute an extra period of common planning time on Wednesdays to support the professional growth of teachers through inquiry so that teachers can engage in collaborative conversations around data and examine their practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have disaggregated formative and summative ELA data at the end of every unit in order to monitor student progress and implementation of instructional shift of academic vocabulary resulting in 80% of students showing growth from Pre to Post On Demand Writing Pieces and attaining grade level benchmarks on the TCRWP Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade level teams will collaboratively analyze ELA data (running records, student writing pieces (pre and post) and iReady benchmarks) by sorting students' work, examining the traits and identify patterns or groups of students relative to their achievement to highlight the needs of groups that may be underperforming or to whom they may need to pay special attention to support and/or further challenge their learning. Specific skills, concepts, practices and experiences will be noted for each group so that they can advance to the next level of achievement. Other factors that will be brought out include a particular student's learning, strengths, challenges or past performance. These will help teachers actionable and meaningful feedback for students. Provide on-site and/or external learning opportunities for whole staff, teacher teams and/or individual teachers to increase awareness of success tips, specific protocols and data gathering templates for analyzing student work. Parents will be invited to attend Curriculum Night, publishing celebrations and workshops to increase awareness of strategies that support high quality reading and writing instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Students 9/12,9/19,9/26, Teachers 10/3,10/10,10/17, 10/24,10/31, 11/7,11/14,11/21,11/28, 12/5,12/12,12/19, 1/2,1/9,1/16,1/23,1/30, 2/6,2/13,2/27, 3/6,3/13,3/20,3/27, 4/3,4/10,4/24, 5/1,5/8,5/15,5/22,5/29, 6/5,6/12,6/19 Grade Leaders 9/12, 10/3, 11/6, 12/5, 1/2, 2/6, 3/6, 4/3, 5/1, 6/5 Administration, SDC Parents 11/28,2/27,5/29 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level teams will create and distribute a monthly newsletter for parents outlining some of the strategies the teachers are implementing in the classroom to support all students to attain academic success. Parent Coordinator also distributes a monthly calendar of relevant workshops for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, SDC (Staff Development Committee) members, google docs, common planning time on Wednesdays, schedule adjustments, teacher per session and per diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. TC Running Records K-2 By November 2018, 20% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By January 2019, 60% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By March 2019, 70% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. By June 2019, 80% of K-2 students will see an increase in reading by 2 levels as measured by the TCRWP Running Records. Writing Data K-2  Kindergarten By October 2018, 80% of Kindergarten students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Kindergarten Rubric for Informational Writing. By December 2018, 80% of Kindergarten students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Kindergarten Rubric for Persuasive Writing. By March 2019, 80% of Kindergarten students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Kindergarten Rubric for Narrative Writing.  First Grade By October 2018, 80% of First Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the First Grade Rubric for Informational Writing. By February 2019, 80% of First Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the First Grade Rubric for Narrative Writing. By May 2019, 80% of First Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the First Grade Rubric for Persuasive Writing. 2018-19 CEP 22   Second Grade By October 2018, 80% of Second Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Second Grade Rubric for Persuasive Writing. By January 2019, 80% of Second Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Second Grade Rubric for Narrative Writing. By April 2019, 80% of Second Grade students will see an increase in writing by 1 level as measured by the Second Grade Rubric for Informational Writing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Running Records of Literacy, Gradewide Rubrics for Informational, Persuasive and Narrative Writing Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Quality Review conducted in May 2018, a closer look at the integration of the instructional shifts within our unit plans and lesson plans revealed some inconsistencies across the grades and subject areas. Additionally, it was also revealed that curricula and academic tasks are planned to support students with disabilities and ELLs; however, our highest achieving students are not consistently engaged in cognitively challenging tasks. Root causes identified include the need to understand how to strategically integrate our school's stated focus and to ensure that articulate and create cognitively engaging tasks for high achievers for all of our lessons. Our priority need is to plan a book study to support the professional growth of teachers through a book study. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have received professional development in Transformational Literacy to leverage the instructional shifts of the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) resulting in 100% of them demonstrating growth by one level in the Engaging Students in Learning component of the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach and Teacher Leaders will be participating in a planning session in order to devise professional learning opportunities that revolve around transformational literacy. A book study of Transformational Literacy by Ron Berger and Libby Woodfin will be planned in order to help teachers leverage the instructional shifts of the CCLS--building knowledge through content-rich nonfiction, reading and writing with evidence and regular practice with complex text--to engage all students, including ELLs and SWDs, in challenging tasks. The following strategies will address the needs of ELLs and SWDs: selection of high-quality texts; high quality written work; models, critiques and descriptive feedback; read evidence-based thinking, talking and writing; and, close reading. Parents will be invited to attend Curriculum Night, publishing celebrations and workshops to increase awareness of literacy strategies that support reading instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, Teacher Leaders Teachers 9/17 Administration 9/17,9/24, 10/1,10/15,10/22,10/29, 11/5,11/19,11/26, Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, Teacher Leader 12/3, 12/10,12/17, 1/7,1/14,1/28, 2/4,2/11,2/25, 3/4,3/11,3/18,3/25, 4/1,4/8,4/15,4/29, 5/7,5/13,5/20 Parents 9/13,11/28,2/27,5/29 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The PTA President will share a brief synopsis of next steps formulated by the SLT Committee around Transformational Literacy. The Parent Coordinator will work closely with the SDC (Staff Development Committee) to put together handouts and other resources for dissemination. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, SDC (Staff Development Committee) members, google docs, Monday PD, schedule adjustments, teacher per session and per diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 75% of teachers will have demonstrated growth by one level in the Engaging Students in Learning component of the Danielson Framework by strategically providing multiple entry points and high-quality supports and extensions into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 indicated that 92% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. Root causes identified include how the school delineates all of the ways in which parents can volunteer in the school within the context of the myriad of parent activities that are organized in the year, including parent workshops. Our priority need is to share a list of planned workshops and activities so that parents can sign-up in advance in our efforts to support our schoolwide goal related to transformational literacy, our instructional focus for the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of parents will have attended a learning opportunity in school to increase their knowledge of transformational literacy or rigorous academic tasks in reading, writing, math, social studies and science as measured by the sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Create a survey at the beginning of the year delineating all of the learning opportunities related to our goal of tranformational literacy for increased support such as: Parents September through June Administration and Teachers -Preparing a presentation for Meet the Teacher -Creating materials for the parents to review at home -Workshops on Text Selection and Evidence-Based Thinking, Talking and Writing ● Send grade-level monthly newsletters to inform parents about the curricular programs’ goals and activities. To address the needs of SWDs, ELLs and other high-need subgroups, we will share the following strategies with the parents: prompts, sentence starters, anchor charts, discussion checklists, role play and visual aids. Parents Monthly Teachers ● Communicate via the website about school events and activities Parents Ongoing Administration, Pupil Accounting Secretary and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Studio in a School, Inside Broadway Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, Tuesday schedule, schedule adjustments, teacher per session and per diem 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have had 10% of parents volunteer in at least one professional learning opportunity related to transformational literacy or rigorous academic tasks in reading, writing, math, social studies and science . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey and Sign-In Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 and 2 on Running Records of Literacy Level 1 and 2 on end-of-chapter tests Performance on key assignments Performance on key assignments Low performance across all subjects coupled with major event Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Web-based program, thematic units One-to-one and small group Before and after school One-on-one, small group During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day RTI Resource: Reteach Teacher and Student Book Computer program One-to-one Computer program One-to-one Counseling services One-to-one or small group 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We intend to provide students with supplies and instructional materials, and school uniforms. We will also make counseling services available for students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Presently, all of our teachers are highly qualified. Our strategies and activities for recruitment, retention, assignments and support include the following: ● Attend job fairs ● Utilize DOE Open Market system ● Partner with Columbia University and New York University in order to advertise positions on their listserv in recruiting the best possible candidates ● School Hiring Committee filters pool of candidates, schedules and conducts interviews ● Demo lessons as part of the interview process ● Teachers encouraged to pursue dual certification (Common Branch and TESOL) ● Dual certified teachers assigned to teach ESL self-contained classes ● Bilingual certified teachers assigned to teach in the Dual Language Program ● Early Childhood certified teachers assigned to teach in the Pre-K Program ● Cluster teachers certified in area of specialization (PE, Music, Theatre) ● Teachers supported through ongoing PD provided in-house or outside the school in literacy, math, by the network, DOE offices, etc. Professional Development offered by DOE and outside vendors 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 33  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principal, and paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS) include the following:  Job-Embedded Models ● Peer Coaching, Mentoring ● Action Research ● Collaboration Around Student Work ● Reflective Practice ● Personal Learning Plan  Outside Knowledge Models ● Subject Matter Projects ● Network Conferences ● Webinars ● Professional Book Study Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 34  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our transition plan used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program includes the following activities: ● Invite parents and their children to visit the school and the classroom to meet with the teacher the year prior to starting school ● Encourage parents to read with their children at night ● Mail out the “Ready for School!” poster during the summer so that parents can help prepare their child for starting school by having them conduct a daily activity beginning 14 days before school starts ● Send out First Day Letter written by teachers ● Schedule a Meet the Teacher Open House in early September ● Introduce Psychologist and Social Worker to parents 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Shared decision making is the process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Having established an SDC (Staff Development Committee) comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, grade leaders and UFT Chapter Leader, the team is responsible for setting the educational agenda for the school, including those surrounding assessments. Shared decision making allows members of the school community to collaborate in identifying problems, defining goals, formulating policy, shaping direction and monitoring program implementation. The process requires analysis of information, the development of plans to address identified needs, and the creation and implementation of monitoring systems to evaluate procedures and results. Grade leaders solicit input from grade level colleagues for greater transparency and ownership. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 110,774.00 35,251.00 12,366.00 0 1,733,156.00 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 5a,5b,5d,5e 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 36   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 222Q – FF Christopher A. Santora School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 222Q – FF Christopher A. Santora School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 222Q – FF Christopher A. Santora School School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 40  P.S. 222Q – FF Christopher A. Santora School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 42  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: FF Christopher A. Santora This school is (check one): DBN: 30Q222 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 222 Title III Program provides English Language Learners (ELLs) with supplemental instruction in an After School ESL Program which will service ELLs in kindergarten, and grades 1 and 2 who score at the Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels on the NYSESLAT. Our school implements a Dual Language Program and a free standing ESL program. The After School ESL classes will meet for a total of 42 sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays, beginning on October 17, 2018 and ending on April 17, 2019 from 2:30 pm to 3:45 PM (1 1/4 hours). The Kindergarten After School ESL Program services 15 ELL students; the First Grade After School ESL Program will services 15 ELL students; the Second Grade After School ESL Program will service 11 ELL students. The Kindergarten group will consist of 2 Transitioning Level students and 13 Expanding Level students. The First Grade group will consist of 1 Transitioning Level student and 14 Expanding Level students. The Second Grade group will consist of 1 Emerging Level students, 4 Transitioning Level students and 6 Expanding Level students. Two paraprofessionals will be hired to assist the kindergarten and first grade teachers with small group instruction for SWD ELLs and ELLs. The three Title III teachers will collaboratively plan lessons for the After School Title III Program at no cost to the program. These teachers are appropriately certified in ESL or bilingual Spanish. Outlined below is a list of the materials we will use in the program. These consist of supplemental materials and are distinct from those used for daily instruction. • Language Program: Building Language Proficiency by Teacher Created Materials is a highly differentiated and rich English language development resource which is anchored by a dynamic, level-appropriate text set that provides rigorous instruction in the four language domains: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. This program covers a variety of genres, subjects, and high-interest topics with the 30-piece themed and leveled text set in print and digital formats. • Read, Reason and Write, a program by Continental Press designed to improve student performance in a number of key reading skills. Each book contains high-interest reading selections related to a given theme. These selections form the base for a range of reading comprehension and writing activities, including graphic organizers to help students sort out their thoughts. The reading selections found within the student books are organized in ascending readability levels, starting slightly below and building to a high on-grade level. This approach uses rigorous text to “stretch” students’ reading comprehension, as is required by state standards based on the Common Core. Additionally, the books come in multiple themes per grade level with a balance of fiction and non-fiction passages in order to motivate readers. Furthermore, each book contains two review lessons that require students to think about several selections at one time-synthesize, generalize, and conceptualize. Application of this type of higher-level thinking skill is a fundamental part of today's standards and the Common Core. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information • Reading for Comprehension series, a program by Continental Press, includes 46 high-interest, non-fiction articles with questions that reinforce key reading and writing skills. This series also addresses the reading skills of vocabulary, main idea and details, sequence, cause and effect, and inferences and conclusions. Students answer open-ended questions pertaining to narrative text, descriptive text, persuasive text, and expository text. • Vocabulary Links for English Language Development by Continental Press, reinforces knowledge of grade-level content words in science and social studies. Motivating activities and reviews repeatedly expose students to target words and address current academic standards. • Practice Exercises in Basic English by Continental Press, is designed for struggling learners and ELLs who need extra support in basic grammar, usage, and word study skills. Student attendance will be taken at the start of each session. Students who are absent will be marked "A", and those who are present will receive a check mark. Parent notifications, including registration, confirmation and cancellations, will be written in English and Spanish. Student work will be maintained in individual student folders by the classroom teacher. Parents will receive a progress report every other month. Teachers of these classes will communicate with their students' parents on a need-to-know basis during the parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoon. Since the paraprofessionals are bilingual, they will provide home language support in class, as needed. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Professional development will be coordinated by the SDC (Staff Development Committee) which includes the following staff members: Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, UFT Chapter Leader, Grade Leaders for K, 1 and 2 at no cost to the Title III Program. This component will provide teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching ELLs. Sessions will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal. Professional development will take place in 12 one-hour sessions after school, and teachers will be paid per session. Facilitators will provide staff development at no cost to the program. These 12 one-hour professional development sessions will target the following due to the selection of new materials this school year, new teachers that have joined the program, and alignment with this year's school's instructional focus of transformational literacy which entails leveraging the Common Core instructional shifts--building knowledge through content-rich nonfiction, reading for and writing with evidence, and regular practice with complex text--to engage students in work that matters. · · · · Familiarization and Implementation of Instructional Materials Differentiation Strategies and Pacing Calendars Integrating Technology to Enhance Learning&nbsp; Danielson's&nbsp;Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development We firmly believe that our professional development will positively impact the progress of ELLs due to the fact that the materials chosen are researched-based and reinforce the concepts and skills that are taught throughout the day. There will be a sign-in sheet for every planning session as well as a written agenda and a recording of the minutes of each session. The information will be monitored by the Assistant Principal and maintained in the Assistant Principal's Office. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We will offer a number of parent workshops, both during the day and after hours, to help support parents and extend the home-school connection. These workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator, the Literacy Coach and the Assistant Principal. The offerings were informed by a parent survey conducted at the beginning of the year. An analysis of survey results indicated that parents need support understanding the homework and their children's interim progress reports. It also indicated that they welcome opportunities to contribute to meaningful activities in school such as Career Day, and learn more about school goals and our instructional focus for the year. Notices are translated to Spanish and backpacked . A monthly Parent Calendar is distributed listing all of our events and gatherings. Additionally, the website includes posts which parents can access at any time through the world wide web. Records and sign-in sheets are maintained in the Principal's Office and in the Parent Coordinator's files. September 13 (4:30 - 7:30 PM - 3 hours): Title of Workshop: All About Homework - Introduce parents to the various curricular programs that we have in school. Explicit model how they are to work with the children at home in reading and math through an interactive activity. Rationale: Parents are always intrigued about how to help their children at home with the homework. They state that reading and math are taught differently from when they first went to school; therefore, this will help them support their children at home. October 11 (2:30 - 3:30 PM - 1 hour): Title of Workshop: Internal Progress Reports - Present our school's progress reports which they will receive in early October, January and May. These are in addition to the report cards which get distributed in November, March and June. Rationale: Communicating with parents about their children's performance in school will lead to greater parental involvement and higher academic achievement in the students. November 28, February 27 and May 29 (6:00 - 7:00 PM - 1 hour x 3 = 3 hours): Transformational Literacy Series - Raise parents' awareness of the key instructional shifts our school is emphasizing this year, i.e. text-based answers and vocabulary development. Rationale: Parents will acquire strategies on how to select high-quality books and engage their children in evidence-based thinking, talking and writing. April 12 (9:00 - 11:00 AM - 2 hours): Career Day - Coordinate a Career Day where parents volunteer to come and speak to the students about their careers. Their presentation will include 2018-19 CEP 48 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the types of subjects one would need to master in school. Rationale: Increase parent participation and student achievement through this partnership as parents share information about their own careers and skills. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. para per session (31.37 x 42 x 2 = 2635.08) teacher per session (50.13 x 42 x 1 1/4 x 3 = 6316.38) teacher per session PD (50.13 x 12 x 3 = 1804.68) pencils, folders Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2,635.08 7,895.48 1,804.68 30.76 12,366 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name FF Christopher A. Santora School Borough Queens School Number 222 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yvonne Marrero Coach Irene Zajac ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Khrystyna Mokrytska, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Denys Pena, DL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Nelly Vargas Superintendent Assistant Principal Rossana Awais Coach School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Betty Benitez Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 246 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 57 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the TC running records to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. An analysis of end-of-year data collected in June 2015 revealed that 51% of our ELLs in grades K-2 (36 students), are reading below grade level. As a result , we will be implementing guided reading and small group instruction to support this population of students. In addition, these students will be invited to attend the RTI Program before-school as well as the after-school program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 51  We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs through teacher observations, student portfolios, TC running records five times a year, NYSESLAT data, and the MOSL Math and Performance Tasks for ReadyGen and Go Math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our students are benchmarked in reading using TC running records. Students who score in Levels 1 or 2 are automatically placed in the RTI program for supplemental instruction in reading three times a week for 30 minutes using the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Program. These students also complete a diagnostic assessment in order to provide teachers with additional information regarding students' specific needs so that instruction is targeted. Progress monitoring is scheduled once a week for Level 1 students and bi-weekly for Level 2 students. Students are also invited to our before-school remediation program using a web-based literacy program, iStation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT show that 50% of our studens reached the Expanding level of proficiency, 12% reached the Transitioning level of proficiency, and 6% and 7% reached the Emerging and Entering levels of proficiency, respectively. 30% of our students (21 students) reached the Commanding level of proficiency in the NYSELAT Administration this past Spring 2015. Taking out the discharged students, this year we have: 6 students at the Emerging performance level, 5 students at the Entering performance level, 10 students at the Transitioning performance level, and 36 students at the Expanding performance level for a total of 57 ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students are heterogeneously grouped by grade level. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL. For integrated ENL, our students receive 180 minutes of instruction by the classroom ENL teacher, who is also a certified content area teacher. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of flexibility by the classroom ENL teacher, who is also a certified content area teacher. Commanding/Proficient students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA by the classroom ENL teacher, who is also a certified content area teacher. Differentiated instruction and scaffolding strategies are used to ensure academic success. Scaffolding strategies make use of visuals and graphics during group activities where children learn cooperatively from each other. Students also reinforce their learning through hands-on activities. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not currently have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 52  Students are heterogeneously grouped in our DL program and receive content area instruction in both the home language and in English. An ENL and home language arts component is in place to develop skills across all four modalities. Our school uses the alternating-day model in which ocntent used for content areas alternates from day to day. Differentiated instruction and scaffolding strategies are used to ensure academic success. Scaffolding strategies make use of visuals and graphics during group activities where children learn cooperatively from each other. Students also reinforce their learning through hands-on activities. We endeavor to have 50% ELLs and 50% EPs; however, it is not always possible. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For our ENL classes, instructional minutes in ENL, ELA and HLA are explicitly noted on the program cards of the teachers in charge of the ENL and DL classes. Students at the Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL services. Students at the Advanced/Exapnding Level receive 180 minutes of ENL services. Students at the Proficient/Commanding level recive 90 minutes a week of ENL services. In our Dual Language program, Native Languague Arts is delivered on alternating days (2 days one week, 3 days the following week). Students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of ENL in the content area of math. For our DL classes, language of instruction alternates by day, and an ENL and home language arts component is in place to develop skills across all four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing). All of our former ELL's are in classrooms with a certified ESL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the ENL pogram, the instructional approaches that we use to teach the content areas to our ELL students are effective and are research-based. Research shows that language learning and literacy learning are interrelated. They are both developmental, cognitive processes that promote the acquisition of the four skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Before planning the learning experiences for ELLs, our teachers also use formal and informal assessments to learn their level of English language proficiency and their current levels of knowledge and skills in literacy and the content areas. The use of whole group and small group direct teaching is pervasive in all our ELL programs, and it is scaffolded by the following practices during content area instruction: Activating students’ prior knowledge on a given topic. Explicit modeling of a strategy through mini lessons using well illustrated texts. Introduction of new vocabulary through actions, gestures, pantomime and pictures (Total Physical Response) Using prefixes, suffixes, and root words to figure out the meaning of new vocabulary words. Interactive word walls with pictures, definitions, and examples for each word. Use of graphic organizers, charts, and rubrics to aid comprehension. Use of repetition, restatements, periodic summaries, and paraphrasing to clarify the learning experience. Speaking in relatively short sentences and using key words in giving directions. Creating task flow charts with illustrations to help monitor learning. Allowing students to try out a modeled strategy through turn and talk sessions or think-pair share sessions. Re-teaching and reinforcing strategies through strategy groups. Sharing of student use of strategies through mid-workshop interruptions and share sessions. For our Spanish speaking students the use of cognates is utilized to support Native Language Arts in the content areas. The DL program integrates ELLs with English proficient speakers so that all students develop second language skills while acquiring content area knowledge in both languages (English and Spanish). Both groups serve as language models for each 2018-19 CEP 53  other, and through their interactions, they experience growth in both languages. Students are expected to build academic skills in their native language and transfer these skills to the English language. It is important to note that our Dual Language program begins in Pre-K with one class (one of the two Pre-K classes) devoted to learning in both English and Spanish. Students in the Dual Language program K-2 receive 50% of instruction in English via the rollercoaster model; one day in Spanish and one day in English. Therefore the content areas are addressed in both languages on alternating days. For materials our current reading program ReadyGen is content area based. Students are learning about a variety of science and social studies topics in a literacy setting. For the DL classes, Calle de la Lectura (Reading Street) is also used to support Native Lanuage Arts an the content areas. The ReadyGen program is aligned to the CCLS and offers support for the ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In our DL program, students are assessed using the SISTEMA DE EVALUACIÓN DE LA LECTURA. In addition, newly admited Spanish entitled students are given the LAB-R in Spanish to determine native language level of literacy. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. In as much as we are a Pre-K to 2 school, we do not have SIFE (students with interrupted formal education). In the event that SIFE students were to be enrolled, our SIFE plan would emphasize: The use of a strong, researched-based Fundations program to teach students the phonemic principles of the English language through themes, big books, large picture letter cards, games, songs and nursery rhymes using a multi-sensory approach. Individual and small group instruction through our AIS staff to fill in the gaps in their education using such programs as Fountas and Pinnell Level Literacy Intervention and iStation and rich just-right leveled multi-cultural classroom libraries. The implementation of ReadyGen program's ELL component that supports the learning the style of our SIFE students. b. Newcomer ELLs who enter in kindergarten and first grade are afforded the same level of excellent education by our certified ENL teachers. In addition, students are offered a seat in our morning program, extended day program and our after school program. Newcomer ELLs who enter in second grade receive extra support to catch up in reading, math, and English. c. For ELL students receiving 4 to 6 years of service , students are offered a seat in our morning RtI program, extended day program and our after school program. d. N/A e. Former ELLs receive an additional two years of ENL support. No specific testing modifications are needed, since our students do not take any state or city assessments. Students are given extra time during performance tasks, as well as End of Unit Assessments and the directions are read twice to them. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies for our ELL/SWD students are differentiated instruction and scaffolding strategies such as picture voabulary connections, use of technology and music, and role playing. Smart boards are installed in all classrooms and teachers receive on going professional devleopment on how to use smartboard thechnologies in the classroom on a daily basis in all content areas. The ReadyGen program provides students with grade level materials across the science and social studies content areas including leveled books, big books and authentic grade level complex texts ensure that ELL/SWDs are provided with access to academics in the content areas and acceleration in English language development. In addition, the FOSS kits, McMillan McGraw Hill for Science and Houghton Mifflin for social studies are used in both program models to deliver content area instruction. With the RSPD report, that details our ELL/SWDs , we are able to assure these students all the services that they need are provided to them. Our teachers are licensed in Bilingual and ENL. We also provide a Spanish speaking Paraprofessional for those students. To ensure that ELL/SWDs whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction, we currently have bilingual speech therapists, occupational therapists and physical therapists to provide the appropriate instruction. 2018-19 CEP 54  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Flexible programming is in place across all grades K-2. In several classes we currently have D. 75 students whole have been mainstreamed; therefore, they receive all of their content areas in the general education setting with a SETSS teacher available for support. In addition, we also have several grade 1 and grade 2 ELL/SWD students who have been mainstreamed into the ENL classes for at least 2 periods a day for literacy keeping with their IEP goals. We currently do not have ICT classes in our school, however in the event that we do, students will be appropriately placed according the the ICT model of 60% general education students and 40% ELL/SWD students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In regards to our intervention services, we have an AIS/SETTS Teacher who provides intervention services for kindergarten through seond grade students, including ELLs and SWDs through the use of RtI Morning Porgram using Star Literacy, KidsA-Z, Fountas and Pinnell Level Literacy Program and digital access for Go Math. All these programs use English as the language of instruction. We also have a part time AIS/reading intervention teacher who provides additional support for our ELLs in reading. In addition, all classroom teachers use guided reading on a daily basis to target our ELLs K-2 who show a specific need in reading and writing skills as shown through the results of the TC Running Records, Star Literacy (comprehension, vocabulary, phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency) and results from the Spring NYSESLAT. In mathematics, social studies and science , the activity for each lesson is differenatiated based on ability and language while the overall goal is the same for all students. The native language is used primarily in the dual language classes as a source for intervention, in addition to using picture cues, TPR activities and Spanish cognates to support learning in ELA, math, science and social studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ELLs participate in our RTI morning program, using I-Station, our Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM), Extended Day, and After-School programs. Our Title III program provides ELLs with supplemental instruction in an After School setting servicing ELLs in first and second grades. Our morning program is using I-Station, while our After School Program is using the Read, Reason and Write Program from Continental Press. We intend to continue with the use of these programs to achieve the results intended. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs that currently fit this category. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELL students are taught the same curriuculum that the rest of the school follows (Go Math, ReadyGen Reading, Zaner Bloser Writing, Fundations, teacher created sciecne and social studies curriculum). Some of our ELL's are invovled in the RtI program (depending on their reading level - only our struggling students participate. So if an ELL is a struggling student then they are part of the RtI program.) ELL students also particpate in our speciality classes which include Theater, Physical Education and Music program. All of our students and parents (general Ed, ELLs and SWDs) are invited to be part of our After-School programs. Letters are sent home in the preferred parent language. They are able to choose whether they want their children involved in these extra activities. Classroom teachers encourage our parents to involve their children in these programs. Our school currrently offers an after school ESL program and an enrichment program, SEM, on Fridays, that is offered in three cycles of 10 weeks, with each cycle targeting all students in a specific grade. Some of the activities for SEM include Zumba Kids, Drawing from Life and Color, Shape Collages, Brazil, Play-Doh and Clay Engineers and Kiddie Boot Camp. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Smart boards are installed in all classrooms and teachers receive on going professional devleopment on how to use smartboard technologies in the classroom on a daily basis in all content areas. We are using ReadyGen in reading, Zaneer Bloser in Writing and Go Math programs. Teachers and students have access to the 2018-19 CEP 55  digital Go Math online version, available in both English and Spanish, to support learning (online videos to reinfornce math topics, online manipulatives that all students can access to assist in completing homework assignments). For ReadyGen, text collections have been uploaded to google docs so that all students can access grade level complex text. Supplemental reading for guided reading groups during class and during the RtI period we use Fontas-Pinnell Leveled Literacy Program. The ReadyGen program provides students with grade level materials across the science and social studies content areas including leveled books, big books and authentic grade level complex texts ensure that ELL/SWDs are provided with access to academics in the content areas and acceleration in English language development. In addition all our students have access to the KidsA-Z online reading program for additional support. Students and parents have home access as well. Training was given to our parents in their preferred language if available, on how to access the KidsA-Z program. We also have an online subscription to BookFlix that supports reading aloud in both English and Spanish. In addition, the FOSS kits, McMillan McGraw Hill for Science and Houghton Mifflin for social studies are used in both program models to deliver content area instruction. Teachers also use Pebblego, an online science and social studies database for research. For our ELL after school program we are using Language Power by Teacher Created Materials, a program specifically made to target ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In order for students to succeed in the acquisition of any language, we must ensure that there is transference of skills from their native language to English. Prior to beginning any new unit of study, our ENL teachers build background knowledge. With this knowledge we are able to scaffold learning and introduce our students to hands-on real life experiences. One example of using native language skills is since the majority of our students are of Hispanic heritage, we are able to use their native language as a tool for instruction. Academically we show them the similarities of words in Spanish and English. Cognates are words that have similar pronunciations and spellings in both languages, and frequently have the same meaning (i.e. la musica/music, las ciencias/science, el papel/paper). We take neighborhood walks and talk about the ethnic culture that surrounds us. In our DL classes, 50% of instruction is in Spanish, and 50% in English; the rollercoaster model; one day English, one day Spanish. In ENL, instruction is in English, but are teachers and paraprofessionals help students using their native language during lessons to help support them with their tasks. Cuaderno de lectores y Escritores is used in all the DL classes K-2, the Go Math program in available in both English and Spanish. For Ready Gen, when a anchor text is available in Spanish the teachers use the Spanish title, otherwise they translate the anchor text and use a comparable text to teach the Spanish lessons. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use several reports to ensure that all students receive the mandated services for their English proficiency level. Those reports include the RLER and RELL. Once students have been identified, they are placed in the appropriate age and grade level class. . Grade level support and resources are available in all classes in all content areas including leveled books that ensure that they are provided with access to academics in the content areas and acceleration in English language development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Smart boards are installed in all classrooms and teachers receive on going professional devleopment on how to use smartboard technologies in the classroom on a daily basis in all content areas. We are using ReadyGen in reading, Zaneer Bloser in Writing and Go Math programs. Teachers and students have access to the digital Go Math online version, available in both English and Spanish, to support learning (online videos to reinfornce math topics, online manipulatives that all students can access to assist in completing homework assignments). For ReadyGen, text collections have been uploaded to google docs so that all students can access grade level complex text. Supplemental reading for guided reading groups during class and during the RtI period we use Fontas-Pinnell Leveled Literacy Program. The ReadyGen program provides students with grade level materials across the science and social studies content areas including leveled books, big books and authentic grade level complex texts ensure that ELL/SWDs are provided with access to academics in the content areas and acceleration in English language development. In addition all our students have access to the KidsA-Z online reading program for additional support. Students and parents have home access as well. Training was given to our parents in their preferred language if available, on how to access the KidsA-Z program. 2018-19 CEP 56  We also have an online subscription to BookFlix that supports reading aloud in both English and Spanish. In addition, the FOSS kits, McMillan McGraw Hill for Science and Houghton Mifflin for social studies are used in both program models to deliver content area instruction. Teachers also use Pebblego, an online science and social studies database for research. For our ELL after school program we are using Language Power by Teacher Created Materials, a program specifically made to target ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students are given the LAB-R to determine their placement at the beginning of the school year. The newly enrolled students are given a tour of the school conducted by our Parent Coordinator, including the child's the classroom, the multipurpose room (this is where the students eat lunch and have their physical education class). During the school year, we conduct a Family Literacy, coordinated by the Literacy Coach and Math Nights, coordianted by the Assistant Principal, as well as hold a Scholastic Book Fair, facilitated by the parent coordinator, with books for our students in English and Spanish. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our DL program is conducted in English and Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In our DL Program, language instruction is delivered on alternate days in the targeted language. EPs and ELLs are integrated during the course of the day. Content areas are taught in both English and Spanish on alternate days in keeping with the self-contained model of Dual Language. Literacy is taught simultaneously with concepts building on one another, independent of language instruction, so that both EPs and ELLs are taught in their target language 50% of the time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All personnel, teachers, paraprofessionals, and our Parent Coordinator, who work with ELLs are offered the opportunity to participate in workshops and professional development offered through the Department of Education Office of English Language Learners. Our district support team presents professional development and workshops focused on all teachers working with ELLs in enhancing language proficiency. In addition, all teachers have been provided with workshops for our new reading program, ReadyGen, and our new math program, GoMath. The coaches at P.S. 222Q are instrumental in organizing and delivering weekly professional development connected to best practices in literacy, math, and technology instruction. Agendas and sign-in sheets document staff participation in keeping accurate records to ensure all staff meets the minimum number of hours of ELL training. We maintain a listing of PD sessions attended by each staff member, which is kept in a binder. In addition, our ENL and DL language teachers turn-key information they have received at grade conferences. During our inquiry time , our teachers are involved in cycles of learning to explore teaching practices that provide access to the content and thereby support the academic growth of all of our students. This work is connected to the Danielson Framework and our CCLS-aligned curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 57  P.S. 222 Professional Development Plan Date Focus September 8 (Welcome Back) Staff Handbook & Administrative Binder Overview, Chancellor’s Regulations, CEP Goals Learning Environment Survey Safety: Door Alarms, Safety Video, De-escalation September 21 Planning the First Cycle of Learning – Ms. Marrero RtI – STAR Administration Timeline – Ms. Marrero 408 Documentation – Ms. Bennett and Ms. DiBari September 28 RtI – STAR Reading and STAR Early Literacy Introduction – Ms. Marrero (Review Pretest Instructions; Who can take the STAR Reading and the STAR Early Literacy tests?; Tour of the Home Page; Marking Periods; Screening, Progress Monitoring and Intervention (At/Above Benchmark=Green; On Watch=Blue; Intervention=Yellow; Urgent Intervention=Red) Create Progress Report for Parents (October, January and May) – Grade level teams October 5 Cycle 1 Begins Focus: Examining Effective Research Based Writing Strategies to Support ELL’s Cycle 1, Session 1 October 19 Cycle 1, Session 2 October 26 MOSL Math Scoring K-2 November 2 Cycle 1, Session 3 November 3 (Election Day) Epi Pen Training – Ms. Campbell, School Nurse Instructional Inquiry Cycle Presentation – Ms. Laurie Hallick, UFT Teacher Center Math Planning and Preparation Literacy Planning and Preparation November 9 Cycle 1, Session 4 ELL Topic: Planning and creating word work activities that include cognates to build vocabulary November 16 Cycle 1, Session 5 November 23 Cycle 1, Session 6 November 30 Looking at Data December 7 Share Fair December 14 Planning and Preparation Literacy December 21 Planning and Preparation Math January 4 Cycle 2 Begins Professional Learning Designed around implementing technology Cycle 2, Session 1 January 11 Cycle 2, Session 2 January 25 Cycle 2, Session 3 February 1 Cycle 2, Session 4 – Plan intervisitation schedule February 22 Mid-Year Math Assessment Data Analysis February 29 Cycle 2, Session 5 March 7 Cycle 2, Session 6 March 14 Looking at Data March 21 Share March 28 Planning and Preparation Literacy April 4 Planning and Preparation Math April 11 Cycle 3 Begins Professional Learning on the Integration of Literacy and Mathematics with a focus on ELL students Cycle 3, Session 1 2018-19 CEP 58  April 18 Cycle 3, Session 2 May 2 Cycle 3, Session 3 May 9 Cycle 3, Session 4 May 16 Cycle 3, Session 5 May 23 MOSL Math Scoring K-2 June 6 Cycle 3, Session 6 June 9 (Brooklyn/Queens Day) June 13 Looking at Data June 20 Share June 27 Planning and Preparation Literacy Teachers of ELLs are offered the opportunity to participate in workshops and professional development offered through the Department of Education Office of English Language Learners. We also consider workshops offered by the Fordham RBERN (Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network) as they are often presented by researchers in the field of bilingual education and second language learning, as well as professional learning opportunities offered by the UFT Teacher Centers. Topics range from math, close reading, early literacy and creative writing for bilingual and English language learners. Teachers are encouraged to attend the NYSABE (New York State Association for Bilingual Education Conference) in the Spring. These professional learning opportunities support teachers of ELL's by providing them with tools such instructional strategies, current professional reading and how to implement technology into their classroom. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school is a Pre-K to 2 school; therefore, transitioning for us means getting our students ready for third grade. Our staff is trained on how to promote the academic and personal behaviors of our students. We are committed to developing the learning habits and skills of our students to support academic readiness. These include non-cognitive, socio-emotional qualities that support resiliency, and college/career persistence. At this time we currently do not have a guidance counselor. All of our teachers are presented with a survey about their professional development needs which they get to fill out at the beginning of the year. At the opening Faculty Conference, we review the CEP goals and elicit the types of professional development activities that are going to help support the attainment of the goals. This year, all teachers are expected to engage in cycles of learning driven by student data. Part of this work involves a review of the research so that teachers stay current. Through intervisitations, they will experiment with best practices that promote student engagement at the appropriate levels of challenge so that instruction is rigorous and the content is accessible to all learners. Given that teachers gather in grade level teams, all teachers will receive at least 6 sessions (15% of the total sessions) in ELL-specific professional development. Bilingual/ENL teachers will receive 20 sessions (50% of the total sessions) in the same ELL-specific professional development when you combine this experience with opportunities for professional development out-of-the-building. Agendas and sign-in sheets are maintained in our PD Binder. Some activities (may be more than 1 session) that are teachers participate in are: 1. Examing effective, research based writing strategies to support ELL's 2. Ongoing professional learning deisgned around implementing technology 3. Planning and creating word work activities that include cognates to build vocabulary 4. Class intervisitations are scheduled and then teachers discuss and reflect on observed instructional practices used to target ELL's. 5. Professonial Learning on the Integration of Literacy and Mathematics 2018-19 CEP 59  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs is set in advance at the beginning of the year. This enables us to spread them out across the span of the year although our goal is to schedule them between December and February. In this fashion, parents of ELLs have a myriad of opportunities, outside the parent orientation meeting and parent-teacher conferences to sit with the teacher to learn about the progress that the child is making. By setting the meetings in advance, we can guarantee that interpretation and translation is in place to facilitate a productive exchange. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator has an important role in our school. She is the first line of conenction that our parents have to the school. She answers phone calls on a daily basis for things such as report cards, lunch forms, absentee notes, uniforms, school activities such as field trips, after school activities, book fair, picture day. She conducts monthly workshops on topics related to math and literacy. She assists with translation services. She relates parents' concerns to the principal. In addition, we are fortunate to have a PTA that is interested in addressing the needs of our parent community. All parents are considered active members and are encouraged to participate in all of our fundraising efforts, workshops, learning opportunities and schoool activities including Fall Harvest Night, Pajama Day, Literacy Night, Math Night, Character Hat Day Parade, etc. In addition, parental involvement is assured through a monthly Parent Calendar that highlights parent programs, workshops, and activities for the month, and important "Please Read" sidebars. We offer parent ESL classes in order to enhance parents' English language skills. Naturally, all of our workshops and family nights are well atended. We also encourage attendance at DOE-sponsored ELL Parent Conferences by facilitating the registration process through our Parent Coordinator who then accompanies the group of parents to the conference. Parents are also invited to attend NYSABE in the Spring so that they can learn more about the opportunities and challenges of growing up bilingual. When deemed necessary we contact the Translation and Interpretation Offices for support with parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yvonne Marrero, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: FF Christopher A. Santora School DBN: 30Q222 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Yvonne Marrero Title Principal Assistant Principal Betty Quintero Parent Coordinator Khrystyna Mokrytska ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Denys Pena Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q222 School Name: FF Christopher A. Santora School Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Betty Quintero Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our Pupil Accounting Secretary, Ann Marie Nunez, runs the RAPL report in ATS to determine the percentage of parents' preferred home language. In addition she runs the RCON report for specific information about the written and oral language preference. We also tally responses on Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey and Emergency Contact cards in order to best serve the parent community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 154 55.20 149 53.41 2018-19 CEP 63  Spanish Bengali Tibetan 109 15 1 39.07 5.38 0.36 113 15 1 40.50 5.38 0.36 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Newsletter 9/1/17, 10/1/17, 11/1/17, 12/1/17, 1/1/18, 2/1/18, 3/1/18, 4/1/18, 5/1/18, 6/1/18 Parent Calendar 9/1/17 Parent Handbook 9/13/17 Written Correspondence from school and SLT throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Secretary translates the document as she is bilingual English/Spanish The Parent Coordinator translates the document as she is bilingual English/Spanish Secretary translates the document as she is bilingual English/Spanish Secretary translates the document as she is bilingual English/Spanish 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher September 13, 2017 November PT Conferences November 15-16, 2017 interpretation service(s)? Spanish and Bengali/Hindi speaking staff members, paraprofessionals and school aides Spanish and Bengali/Hindi speaking staff members, paraprofessionals and school aides 2018-19 CEP 64  March PT Conferences March 14-15, 2018 May PT Conferences May 23, 2018 Calls made by Attendance Teacher Throughout the school year Calls made by Classroom Teachers re: behavior and/or academic issues, including homework Throughout the year Spanish and Bengali/Hindi speaking staff members, paraprofessionals and school aides Spanish and Bengali/Hindi speaking staff members, paraprofessionals and school aides Attendance teacher is bilingual English/Spanish Parent Coordinator assists the teachers and she is bilingual English/Spanish 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In so far as 90% of our ELLs are Spanish speakers, our Parent Coordinator who is a Spanish speaker herself, is ale to reach out to the families in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the Faculty Conference on September 5, 2017, all staff will be introduced to Chancellor's Regulation A-663 to inform them about the language requirements and resources available to meet the mandates. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will provide parents who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their preferred language, and with instructions on how to obtain such services. The school will provide in a conspicuous location, at or near the main school entrance, a sign in the covered languages indicating the office where a copy of the written notification can be obtained. The school’s safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring the parents needing language assistance services are able to reach the school in time of an emergency. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will survey the parents mid-year to gather feedback on the quality and availability of translation services so that it can inform our actions in the future. In addition, we will schedule a focus group meeting of parents of all our represented languages to ascertain whether or not the translation services provided via over-the-phone, face-to-face or written was adequate and if the information received was clear. 2018-19 CEP 66 
