2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q227 School Name: I.S. 227 LOUIS ARMSTRONG Principal: HELEN PONELLA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Louis Armstrong Middle School 30Q227 34300011227 5-8 School Number (DBN): 32-02 Junction Blvd., East Elmhurst, New York 11369 718-335-7500 Phone Number: 718-779-7186 Fax: Kim Sanders HPonell@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Helen Ponella Ann Mc Indoo Alyssa Avia Irene Filakouris Yuri Garcie Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): N/A CBO Representative: Jessica Chacha District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11003 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-6122 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11003 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.391.8222 Phone Number: 718.391.8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Helen Ponella Ann McIndoo Alyssa Avia Deanna Maietta Yuri Garcia Not applicable Not applicable IreneFilakouris Bertha Asitimbay *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Elected CSA Member/ Parent Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Wendy James MeiCheung EvieFlouras Janet Goulimis Emil Dominguez Theresa Amalfitano Chris Arrigo Parent Member Parent Member Parent Member Parent Member UFTMember UFTMember UFTMember Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school is a borough-wide school that was established in 1979 to bring together an ethnically diverse group of students in conjunction with New York State Education Department, New York City Board of Education, and Queens College. Over 35 years later, this mission continues today. The school was named to honor the great musician and singer, Louis Armstrong. Louis and his wife Lucille had lived in the local area. 2018-19 CEP 9  MISSION STATEMENT The purpose of establishing the school was to bring together a culturally diverse group of students form the borough of Queens to educate them academically, socially, emotionally, and physically. Louis Armstrong Middle School celebrates strong student achievement and high expectations for all members of our school community. We provide a nurturing and supportive environment with an emphasis on STEM and the arts. We believe in providing every student an opportunity to succeed. What happens here at LAMS will change the world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Louis Armstrong Middle School celebrates strong student achievement and high expectations for all members of our school community, in a nurturing, supportive environment. New York State Department of Education designated our school as “A New York State Reward School” for five consecutive years. For the past three years, New York City Department of Education has recognized us as a “Respect for All School.” Our Robotics Team has won first place in the tri-state area for “Robotics Programming.” In a National Intel Science Competition for Middle School in conjunction with Stony Brook University, our students were bronze medalist in Science Research. To understand Louis Armstrong Middle School, one must first understand the student body that we serve. Our students come from about 100 different countries and speak approximately 51 different languages. About 4% of our students are enrolled in English as A Second Language classes. We believe in providing every student an opportunity to succeed, academically, socially, emotionally, and physically. We accomplish this by providing rigorous, challenging instruction and opportunities. Student learning is enhanced by providing a wide array of opportunities in art, band, chorus, orchestra, technology, robotics, drama, poetry, science, college and career readiness, accelerated Regents Level classes in Algebra, Living Environment and Spanish. We have partnered with several higher education institutions: Queens College, Hofstra, Adelphi, York, Columbia and New York University, to help cultivate our future teachers. These partnerships also aide our teachers in incorporating cutting edge strategies and best practices to address our students learning needs. Other partnerships include: Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Jewish Museum, Guggenheim Museum, Taconic State Park, Space Camp, Gateway National Park, Hall of Science, Museum of Natural History, and Learning through Travel. To serve our diverse population, we are organized into three Houses. Our students are assigned into a house upon their entry into the building. As they begin their journey, they remain in the same house through 8 th grade. There is a dedicated counselor, Assistant Principal and team of core subject teachers for each grade in each house. This structure enables us to conduct weekly meetings with core teams to discuss students’ academic and social needs. The House structure helps us to better serve the needs of our students and to empower teachers to plan for school improvement. The school’s organizational structure supports the continued improvement of instruction. Leadership and faculty implement common core aligned curricula and tasks across grades and content areas, promoting college and career readiness for all students. Parents are a vital part of our school community. Parent surveys are conducted beginning of school to determine wants and needs of all of our parents. Based on survey results we plan our parent workshops to address those needs. Workshops have included: Common Core curriculum in all academic areas. Workshops are planned and scheduled to accommodate our working parents. We offer before and after PTA meeting. We also conduct workshops on weekends. 2018-19 CEP 10  Since the school is named after Louis Armstrong, there is a strong commitment to the arts. All students are exposed and participate in music and art classes throughout their time in our school. The Louis Armstrong Foundation generously provides a grant to support our Arts early bird and after-school programs. This allows students to receive individual and small group instruction to prepare for Concerts and other public performances. The funding received is conceptually consolidated so as to maximize funding. The school’s area of strengths include: Louis Armstrong Middle School has achieved the Title of a Rewards School for five years and was recognized as having the highest gains in the ELA and Math State scores in the borough of Queens. We are also recognized as a Respect for All School. Our priority focuses on every student having an equal opportunity to succeed. Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school is grounded in research-based best practices. This has established our school to be in the top 5% of all middle schools with a population greater than 1500 in NYC based on student progress and achievement on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessment. We are known for having a warm, welcoming and inclusive school environment that provides student orientation programs, emphasis on the academic and personal behaviors, growth mindset, culturally responsive teaching and mindfulness, which are essential for developing the whole child and for college and career success. Teachers work collaboratively in professional learning communities by both content area grade teams (vertical) and house grade teams (horizontal). The school’s key areas for focus for this year include: - Increasing Student Engagement so as to further increase student progress and proficiency so students are college and career ready - Culturally responsive teaching and citizenship - To continue to build teacher capacity in planning and using assessment information to inform instruction - Increase parental involvement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We currently have a total of 360 students from special populations included in our students community. We have 242 students with IEPs from Community Schools Districts and District 75. In addition, we have 65 English as a New Language (ENL) students and 53 Former English as a New Language students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  In all components of the Framework for Great School, our school has made significant gains. However, our focus remains on increasing parent involvement and increasing communication. Translation services are provided in both written and verbal forms on an on needed basis. Over the past year our school made the most progress in the family and community ties. Our attendance surpassed our goal of 5% as indicated by attendance sheets and surveys. Our goal for the 2018-2019 is to continue to increase parent communication by using Pupil Path and electronic platforms to inform parents about real time progress and ability to communicate with parents. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q227 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1586 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 88 89 46 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 25 52 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 66.2% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 50.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 26.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.68 0% 1% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 76.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 110 105 96.0% 7.3% 14.4% 8.2% 13.6% 1.4% 8 9% 5.8 77.2% 85% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: At Louis Armstrong Middle School, we believe that students should be sufficiently and appropriately challenged. Therefore, we encourage students to think critically, creatively, and more flexibly. We encourage students to question their assumptions and think deeply. For example, we emphasize critical thinking skills such as: interpreting and analyzing data, making connections between historical periods, and current events, using both primary and secondary sources to support an argument or position, and arriving at a novel interpretation of a historical event after conducting extensive research on the topic. We understand that Rigorous learning is hard work and may lead to some push back. Rigorous learning must always be monitored and supported as it requires a balance between perceived challenges and perceived skills. We also believe that appropriately rigorous learning experiences motivate students to learn more and learn more deeply. In addition, this provides a sense of personal accomplishment when they overcome a learning challenge. Rigorous learning will take root only when students can see a direct connection between their effort, connections and sense of achievement. In keeping with our core beliefs and after examining our data, we determined that our Instructional foci will be Implementing the Advanced Literacy shift of data and assessment with an emphasis on vocabulary. Instructional Focus: Advanced Literacy If we increase accessibility to data across departments in order to collaboratively and strategically analyze and link the data to instructional outcomes by crafting culturally responsive pedagogy; then we will maximize student achievement through expanded engagement with targeted, individualized access to instruction for all learners with a focus on ELLs and our lowest third. If we place data at the core of the literacy improvement effort at our school then we will see an increase in the literacy development of all students including our ENL, SWD, and lowest third of students. If we implement high quality formative and summative assessments on a continuous basis and engage in ongoing analysis of the learning and teaching process, then we will make responsive adjustments to instructional planning and delivery. 2018-19 CEP 14  As a school, we made significant progress in all academic tested areas and exceeded our AYP targets in these areas. However, scheduling and accessibility has curtailed the ability of the staff to strategically leverage the data we gather through the assessments we implement throughout the year in order to collaboratively create instruction that is culturally responsive and highly differentiated to our students' needs. As a school we believe that creating opportunities for collaboration and additional training in the effective use and analysis of data will result in the crafting of instruction that will maximize student growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will demonstrate a 3% increase in Reading Lexile levels and a 3% increase in the NYS ELA Test Scores. With an emphasis on using Culturally responsive strategies to effectively meet the needs of all students. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Assistant Principals meet weekly with content specialists and teacher teams taking deep data dives to analyze common assessments and utilize the information to create decision trees systems to link aggregate trends and patterns in students' needs and department-wide instructional planning. Throughout the school year, teachers attend different Professional Development opportunities offered in house and through the Districts Professional Development Office, Queens Plaza North Learning Opportunities, to provide staff with the tools and strategies necessary to develop engaging lessons that foster Advanced Literacy and academic vocabulary, in all subject areas including Mathematics, Social Studies, Science, and the Arts. Weekly collaborative meeting periods will be provided to teacher teams where they will have opportunities to analyze and utilize data in order to develop, align, and revise curriculum and participate in decision making within their departments and the school. Teachers will utilize a “Looking at Student Work” protocol to gather information about student learning and inform revision of instructional units as well as adjusting teacher practice with an emphasis on ENLs, Former ENLs, and SWDs specific to reading, writing and vocabulary development. Culturally responsive workshops will be provided to parents year-round in order for all stakeholders to access the skills necessary to maximize student achievement and reinforce learning at home to ensure that teachers and parents think of each other as partners in education. These workshops will be provided five times during the school year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers School Year 2018-2019 Principal, Assistant Principals,Content specialists, teachers All teachers School Year 2018-2019 Principal, Assistant Principals,Content specialists, teachers All teachers School Year 2018-2019 Principal, Assistant Principals,Content specialists, teachers All teachers School Year 2018-2019 Instructional Cabinet, Targeted Classes Principal, Assistant Principals, Content specialists, teachers Parents/ Parent Coordinator; Teachers and Administration School Year 2018-2019 ENL Consultant, Instructional Cabinet, Targeted Classroom Teachers. 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Content Coaches, Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our goal is to provide our parents with informative workshops throughout the school year. These will include testing, literacy, and math workshops. We partner with the East Elmhurst Community organization and School Mental Health Consultant from the Office of School Health to offer our parents workshops including: Know Your Rights, Parenting Skills, Positive Discipline, Free Legal Services, and Community Resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds to purchase Expeditionary Learning Curriculum (Gr. 5-8) in ELA - Funds to continue Education Consortium Associates and Ready Gen Consultants - Professional Development time on Mondays for 90 minutes. - Teacher work time to collaborate and strengthen lessons and look at student work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students including the subgroups of ENLs, Former ENLs and SWDs will have shown 3% growth from their baseline assessment as measured by their midyear benchmark assessment and increase an average of at least 3% in their Reading Lexile Levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal by using the results of the students' Lexile levels on the Performance Series and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After analyzing the data from our school survey, over 94% of our students feel safe in their classes and 88% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of this school. However, we noticed that, only 87% of students feel safe outside around their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase on how students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria, as measured by the student perception survey administered at the end of the year. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? *We utilized the research-based work from Project Wisdom, as well as the Danielson Rubric to plan our work around creating a Supportive Environment. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Admin, Project Save Teacher, Dean *Teachers analyze data and develop action plans to respond to students’ social and emotional development needs in order for students to become academically and emotionally successful. *Integrating the Common Sense curriculum to bring a sense of awareness regarding cyber-bullying, media safety and online citizenship. * Words of Wisdom”- Daily student announcements are made for students to share positive messages on character and respect and reinforced during advisory. * Teacher collaborative teams meet during PD time to discuss support and strategies for at risk students, lowest 1/3 and top 1/3 and develop action plans that include parent outreach and participation. * Breakfast and lunch clubs meets weekly, facilitated by the Guidance Counselors, to provide social emotional support through opportunities for students to help each other through role-playing, etc. Theme for the Year: "What starts here changes the world” is referenced daily as a positive message for the entire community. We utilize: *Student Support Team weekly meetings to discuss at-risk students, Individualized Education Plans, and Behavioral Intervention Plans Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, School Based Support Team, Administrators, Project Save Teacher 2018-19 CEP 19  *Peer mediation- trained students under the monitoring of an adult address minor student issues between each other and reach a resolution to the problem thus avoiding suspensions while building trust. *Student Organization representatives meet with the Principal at a "Lunch with the Principal" to discuss concerns and suggestions *Student created positive messages posted throughout the school Teams meet with at risk parents on Tuesdays to support the needs of the child and discuss how the parent can support the child at home. Students *Anti-bullying presentations planned by the PTA for students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator, Project Save Teacher, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administrators *Respect for All week posters *Presentations to recognize students’ good deeds and character. LAMS Star bulletin board is located in the main entrance area. Increasing staff presence in the hallways Students Sept. 2018 to Teachers and School Safety June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal, ENL teacher, and DOH Mental Health Consultant. The Parent Coordinator and PTA parent volunteers will be responsible for reaching out to parents. ENL teachers will send home notifications to parents in the parents native language. PTA meetings are posted on the parent calendar. Translated notices are sent home in parents' native language. Topics include: Knowing Your Middle School Student, How Can I Help My Child Become a Better Test Taker, Parenting Skills, and Positive Discipline.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance Counselor, SBST, DOH Mental Health Consultant Services and Resources, Project Wisdom, Words of Wisdom, and Anti-Bullying Programs 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, there will be a 3% improvement in schools safety and environment as indicated from the baseline student and parent survey on School Safety and Environment to the midpoint benchmark survey re-administered to students and parents in February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By the end of February 2019, progress will be reviewed using the school created survey on School Safety and Environment as compared to the results in October. Adjustments to the action plan, if applicable, as measured by the survey results will be made. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing the NYS Proficiency results, Progress results and comparison of City-Wide Schools and Peer Schools data revealed that Proficiency in ELA was 65% and Math was 68% . The NYS Item analysis was used to obtain more specific information that assisted teachers in identifying areas of strengths and challenge for students. Our NYS ELA test indicated that 65% of our students scored levels 3 and 4. However, in analyzing the item analysis, the area that needs to be strengthened is academic vocabulary in all grades particularly in the written responses of the test. ELA and our lowest third (inclusive of ENLs, Former ENLs and SWDs) continue to be our focusA new professional development model will be rolled out in the following school year that will address pedagogical strategies to increase student achievement for these subgroups. In mathematics, the item analysis revealed that students need to continue to develop and strengthen students’ conceptual understanding of the key mathematical concepts and their relationship to one another. Each grade team identified specific concepts for their grade and has regular weekly meetings to share best instructional practices on how to teach those mathematical concepts in the common core learning standards. In keeping with our Instructional Focus of Advanced Literacy shift of data and assessment with an emphasis on vocabulary we are instituting planning and assessment Professional Learning Cycles that will be differentiated and teacher-led. During the school day, time will be allocated for department teams to meet and collaborate with one another on analyzing school-wide population data. This initiative is in keeping with the Advanced Literacy shift of Data and Assessment in placing data at the core of culturally responsive pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in weekly planning and inquiry meetings to look at multiple forms of data to improve instructional practices and incorporate culturally responsive teaching strategies. We will equip students with problem solving skills necessary for College and Career Readiness. Growth will be measured through common assessments, as 2018-19 CEP 22  evidenced by 3% in their benchmark assessments for all students as well as a 3% increase in State-wide ELA, Mathematics, and Science scores. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analysis of Spring 2018 NYS Exams, baselines, mid-year benchmark assessments, final benchmark assessments in Math, Social Studies and Science, and pre and post classroom assessments. ELA will implement Lexile levels three times per year as per a 2018-19 Assessment Calendar. Weekly Professional Learning Inquiry Cycles by Department and Teams. These offerings will be differentiated and teacher-led, and will be responsive to professional development needs communicated by the staff with and through our Professional Learning Committee. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept.2018 - June 2019 All Teachers Sept.2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Professional Learning Committee, Administrators, and Content Specialists Content Specialists, Teachers, Administrators Protocol for a Focused Modified Case Study and Template with a specific lens on the lowest third of all classes, including Special Learners, Former-ENLs and ENLs. All Teachers Sept.2018 - June 2019 Content Specialists, Teachers, Administrators Workshops for Parents of SWDs and ENLs based on parent surveyed needs. Parents October 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, BFSC, Content Specialists 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will gain a better understanding of Collaborative Team Teaching when they attend our open houses, our Parent Teacher Association meetings. The parent coordinator is available to meet parents to inform them of the programs offered in our school. Our school leadership team is equally comprised of both parents and teachers where discussions to align budget and our different programs are discussed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  Professional Learning Calendars for: -Teachers to attend outside Professional Learning -Create and maintain schedule to turn-key outside learning to colleagues (last Monday of each month.) - Schedule weekly Grade Level Team meetings (vertical alignment) to discuss curriculum planning, lessons and look at student work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, teachers will submit the mid-year progress on their case studies for the 10% of their students (the lowest third) using the Focused Modified Case Study Protocol and Template. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal using the Focused Modified Case Study Protocol and Template and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Improvement of lowest third case study students will evidenced in a 3% growth in their benchmark assessments, State-wide ELA, Mathematics, and Science scores. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams are an integral part of our school community. The principal and the school community believe in working together to increase student achievement. Distributive Leadership is vital component in making this happen. Content Instructional Coaches assist in representing their grade level department team concerns and needs In addition, the school has teachers involved on several committees that assist in representing the instructional and emotional supports for increasing student achievement. Such Committees include: School Leadership Team, UFT Consultation, Professional Development, School Intervention Team, etc. Based on discussions with staff, teachers feel that the any outside or in-house professional learning must be practical, interactive and conducted in a series of workshops. In order for teachers not to see things in isolation and as separate indicatives, any new professional learning initiatives must be explained to staff in a manner that helps them to more explicitly see the connections to the Citywide Instructional Expectations and link to the school’s Instructional Focus of Assessment. Our teacher teams work collaboratively to analyze schoolwide data. This includes data analysis, monitoring student products, lesson plan studies, and classroom visitations. Teachers partake in the feedback process as a learning community and exchange ideas with through the lens of the Danielson Framework, PPO classroom visitation tool, as well as through school generated templates. The impact of the teacher teams, facilitated and led by staff members, have resulted in unit plan enhancements, adjustments to pedagogy, and have resulted in improved student outcomes. Through the use of protocols, staff members have engaged in learning rounds to impact many areas of LAMS. As we look to deepen our work around assessment in instruction in order to improve individual student progress, we will align our inquiry work to build greater capacity among staff members to lead the cycles of learning. To address these concerns, the principal an administrator, teacher leaders, the school’s Achievement Coach, Ambassadors and the UFT Chapter Leader meet with members of the Professional Development Committee to develop topics for their grade level department meeting time and discuss issues/concerns regarding staff professional needs for supporting staff in areas they have identified as requiring support to increase student progress and proficiency. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 26  By June 2019, members of the LAMS Inquiry Team will lead their respective departments through Collaborative Learning Cycles in support of our professional learning plan. Through a targeted inquiry focus on subgroup performance, this will result in 75% of our students demonstrating growth by at least one performance level on Common Core aligned tasks in all content areas based on fall and spring comparative analysis.. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Committee will solicit input and feedback from their colleagues about professional learning needs, recommended structures, procedures for effective scheduling, and management of the time. This data will be used to determine our professional learning cycles. Teacher Representative for each subject area October 2018 - June 2019 Inquiry Cycles by Department and Team will address a problem of practice defined by data. Teacher Teams October 2018- June 2019 Professional Learning Committee, Content Specialists, Administrators and Teachers Professional Learning Committee, Administrators, Content Specialists Monthly Workshops for all Parents with an emphasis on parents of SWDs and ENLs students will be provided on: Growth Mindset, Academic Success, and Social Behaviors Parents October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Content Specialists, BFSC 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a result of our Culturally Responsive Training the administration and staff is working closely with the School leadership team to ensure that our parents are part of school wide decisions. Parents are given a needs assessment survey at the beginning of the school year to identify their needs. Parent coordinator will work closely with teacher leaders to develop monthly parent workshops to include them in the learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -TL City-Wide Instructional Expectation Funding of $29,436 for Per-Session to pay teachers for professional development -Monday Professional Learning Time for 90 minutes. 2018-19 CEP 28  -Common Planning time for core subject area teachers using Circular 6 Options and where financially possible building in to teacher schedules prioritized by ‘high stake” subject areas (i.e. ELA & Math) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midyear ELA benchmark writing task with a Common Core aligned writing rubric that will mirror the fall baseline and spring final assessment. By the mid February 2019, we anticipate that 50% of our students will show improvements on the writing and math tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analysis of data from school midterm benchmark data, Classroom Visit Rigor Rubric, Common Core Aligned Rubrics, MAP or STAR assessment data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing the parent information from the School Quality Guide, it was found: Strengths: ● 96% of parents are greeted warmly when coming to the school. ● 95% believe that the school communicates with them in a language and manner in which they can understand. Areas in need of strengthening: ● 87% agree that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. The sub-committee of the School Leadership Team evaluated this last point and believes that use of PupilPath will improve this area along with increased surveyed parent workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100 % of our Instructional staff across the school will be trained in the implementation of Growthmindset strategies to develop positive communication skills and support the social - emotional learning in all classrooms as measured by OORS reports and Skedula. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SLT created a sub-committee to further evaluate areas where parent perceptions scored lower on the Learning Environment Survey. All Parents June 2018 -June 2019 SLT Parent Committee Teachers will receive additional training for IOS to increase parental awareness and communication about their child's grades and have direct conctact with teacher via IOS Parents Sept.2018 - Nov.2019 Translation for all written communication Committee IO Education Parents will receive letters providing a welcome code and instructions how to access PupilPath/IOS. Parents Sept.2018 - Nov.2019 Teachers Monthly parent workshops generated by surveyed parents needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent Coordinator Teachers Community Facilitors If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. IO Education, East Elmcore Community Partnership, Arts and Literacy, Mental Health Awareness Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Parent Coordinator - Outreach to secure community based partnerships 2018-19 CEP 31  -Parent sub-committee from SLT -Teacher committee on Family outreach -Funds to pay for IO Education training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations to facilitate surveyed parent workshops, as measured by a 3% increase in parents who participate in school activities, workshops, and PTA meetings as evidenced by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. This will be measured by analyzing attendance trends using attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Wilson – decoding issues -Elective class Pull-out -Small Group -Before School Academy -After-School Academy When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) This service is provided during the school day for students in the lowest levels of performance. Services are provided before and/or after-school from Dec – May for all other students. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 students and Level 2 students with teacher recommendation Mathematics Level 1 and Level 2 students with teacher recommendation Additional class periods Strategies: > ACE (Answer, Cite Evidence, & Explain) > RAFT (Restate, Answer, For Example, & The Analysis) CRAW Problem Solving Strategy, Problem Based Learning and Strategies -1:1 Tutoring -Elective class Pull-out -Small Group -Before School Academy -After-School Academy This service is provided during the school day for students in the lowest levels of performance. Services are provided before and/or after-school from Dec – May for all other students. -1:1 Tutoring 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Students recommended by teachers for support Glencoe Discovery Learning Tutoring Social Studies Students recommended by teachers for support Passport to Social Studies College 4 All Access At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As need by At-Risk Factors: -Drugs, Alcohol, self-mutilation, outbursts, suspensions, etc. Socratic Method Based on At-Risk behavior and intensity: Can include: -Peer Mediation -SAPIS intervention -Referral to outside agencies for evaluation and/or treatment This service is provided during the school day This service is provided during the school day Small group and 1:1 Videos Tutoring Small group and 1:1 Videos Short-term and follow-up counseling individual initially, and if appropriate, small group. As needed and/or determined by Guidance Counselor, School Assessment Team or Administrators. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 44 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Louis Armstrong Middle School supports the rights of students identified by criteria set in the McKinney-Vento Act as lacking fixed, regular and adequate night time residence. School counselors coordinate with teachers, families and administrators to provide an educational plan for the student when deemed necessary. School counselors discreetly share the list of students identified as being entitled to STH supports with appropriate staff. Working together we assist families in accessing or resolving transportation issues between school and housing. Using appropriate funding, our school staff provides school supplies, funds to cover school trips and personal items as needed by families to insure school success. When necessary, the school based liaison and other staff assist families having difficulty with the process of obtaining appropriate supports or information by reaching out to the STH Family Assistant, STH Liaison, or Borough Liaison. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school collaborates with Queens College, St. John’s University, Columbia University and NYU in the preparation of student teachers. As a result, we are able to observe these candidates and consider as substitute teachers or permanent positions when they become available. We provide our first and second year teachers with experienced mentors and have our achievement coach work alongside them in order to assist them in teaching, curriculum planning and effective assessments. All teachers new to our school are assigned mentors. Additionally, the school’s Achievement Coach checks in with these teachers twice weekly to determine if she can assist them in any way. The Achievement Coach, when necessary, will assist the teacher with planning, conceptual understandings and/or modeling of lessons or other areas identified by the teacher, mentor or administrators. This support is continued during teachers second year, when necessary for particular areas with a greater emphasis and/or during their first year in the school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Learning is on-going and is determined by analysis of multiple sources of data and consultation with staff. Professional Learning includes teachers collaboratively looking at data (assessments, item analysis reports, student work and sharing best practices (ideas, plans, resources and materials) Select key teachers attend professional learning opportunities provided by outside resources (Borough Field Support Center, Vendor(s), Central and Other Consultants) and come back to turn-key the information to the Academic Cabinet and their grade/department colleagues. When requested by teachers or recommended by administrators, the Achievement Coach or outside support will provide support to groups of teachers and/or individual teachers on development needs in an area(s) where they request or an area they need to strengthen. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams work together to collaborate and decide on the use of baseline, benchmark and common assessments for formative assessment purposes. Using data from these assessments modifications are made to curriculum, instructional resources. All teachers are surveyed in the beginning of the year to decide how they want to utilize their professional learning time on Mondays to insure they have adequate time and support in planning and developing and analyzing assessments as part of our school wide foci. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 38  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x 0 x 0 x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C,5D, 5E 0 5A, 0 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 684,038 0 12,366 0 8,906,124 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 39   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Louis Armstrong Middle School in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Louis Armstrong Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Louis Armstrong Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 43  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ●using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ●monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The ENL After School Enrichment Academy is designed to provide instruction to students in an after school small group setting. After reviewing data from the NYSESLAT scores and data analysis standardized exams, students made progress overall. However, reading and writing skills remain the most difficult modalities for students to master. To optimize mastery, students will be grouped by analyzing individual student needs in each of the four modalities of Language Acquisition; Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking. Students will be grouped and instruction will be focused accordingly. To address these needs, 5th-8th grade ENLs will be invited to attend the ENL After School Enrichment Academy. After School Enrichment Academy: The Academy will start December 5 and end March 27. There will b 3 sessions a month for a total of 12. The program will take place over a period of 12 weeks with 1 1/2 hours per session. Students will meet on Wednesdays from 2:45- 4:15 p.m. (1 1/2 hours per session). Group size will be maintained at 12 students. Two(2) certified ENL teachers will work collaboratively with two(2) General Education Language Arts teachers and one(1) Instructional Support Services teacher to provide supplemental instruction to the ENL students in the program. Instruction is aligned with the ENL State Standards and the Next Generation Learning Standards. To ensure that these teachers are using ENL strategies, the ENL certified teacher pushes in the classroom and provides immediate intervention for students and staff. Students in the after school academy are grouped according to their language needs based on data from the 2018 NYSESLAT results. ENL teachers provide direct in class support to ELA teachers. This program is offered to all students receiving services as per CR Part 154 mandates. The program is offered once a week from 2:45-4:15p.m., 1 1/2 hours per session. Two certified ENL teachers, and two ELA teachers who are currently co-teaching, as well as and one Instructional Support teacher, will work collaboratively to address the students individual language skills. A supervisor is also needed because there are no other programs occurring during this time. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the 7th and 8th grade ELA teachers providing instructional support as needed. Students in 5th and 6th grade are grouped together and receive direct instruction form the ENL teacher. Students are grouped according to language acquisition levels; Entering, Emerging, etc. In the after school ENL Enrichment Program teachers are using the NYSESLAT Finish Line prep books along with the online MyOn reading program. Students are given a baseline exam and then are assigned reading books within their lexile level. During the weekend academy teachers use NYSESLAT prep materials and students are given tasks that are similar to the reading, writing, listening and reading components of the NYSESLAT test. The focus of the program is to increase comprehension across the content areas with an emphasis on inference, vocabulary development, reading comprehension and writing. Strategies such as using context clues, pre-teaching vocabulary, scaffolding, prior knowledge and breaking up tasks into smaller chunks are just some of the methods incorporated into our ENL After School Enrichment Academy. Native Language support materials are available for students who 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information need support, including but not limited to, bilingual glossaries, dictionaries and online translation web based sites. Our school's web site is translated in several languages for parents and materials are sent home in their native language upon request. One Assistant Principal will be available to supervise teachers and all ENL students attending the The Enrichment Academy and the ENL Weekend Academy. Records for the after school academy will be kept in a binder and time sheets will be maintained with the payroll secretary. Teachers use the MY On reading program and leveled articles from News ELA as a resource for reading fluency and comprehension. Books and articles are leveled to match the students' individual needs. The program incorporates the four modalities of language acquisition. Students can read and choose a variety of formats: picture books, graphic novels, chapter books, etc. Students will be able to listen to a spoken word audio which models reading fluency. They will also use features that allow them to highlight sentences as they read and look up unfamiliar words using an embedded dictionary. Students will take reading comprehension assessments which will be measured and used to create a personalized profile for each student. This student profile includes assessment scores, time spent reading, number of books read, and a reading growth trajectory. Writing and speaking skills practice will be facilitated using reading passage prompts and student generated discussion questions. The program is aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards as well as the New York State ESL Standards. ENL Weekend Academy: A weekend academy will be offered to the students as we approach the administration of the NYSESLAT exam. Students will meet on Saturdays for 4 hours each session with 4 teachers providing instruction. We follow the mandated instructional time as per CR Part 154 mandates Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: A total of (9) teachers attended Part 2 of the Multilingual Learner Leadership Institute workshop offered by Rosa Delgado, Educational Consortium Rosa Delgado is a DOE approved vendor. She is President, Chief Education Officer (CEO) and Founder at Education Consortium, LLC. She has 32 years of experience in developing an exceptional background in ESL/English as a New Language (ENL) and bilingual/bicultural education in: curriculum and instruction, professional development, dual language programs, and balanced literacy methodology. Teachers participating in the Institute: Rose Izzo, Amy Spears, Chris Francaviglia, Kim Hirsch, Judy Ryan, Kate Martino, Jonathan Chin, Maria Benenati, Ms. Kiesel. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development There will be 2 full day sessions (6 hrs per session) during the year. Agendas will be set based on a data driven needs assessment determined by teachers that teach ENL students. Records, agendas, and attendance will be maintained by the ENL Assistant Principal. The focus of the Title III Professional Development program will be to provide teachers with instructional topics such as strategies to scaffold, modify, and differentiate instruction and assessment. The program also supports teachers in identifying instruction needs of students and determining which instructional strategies can be used ot support individual student needs. Teachers will work together to develop lessons that focus on Higher Order Thinking Skills including inference, predicting, interpreting and evaluating information. Teachers will focus on preparing ENL students to meet and exceed New York City and NY Next Generation Learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental Involvement Our funding will be used to provide our parents and guardians an opportunity to attend several parent workshops throughout the school year. Parent workshops will be both informational and educational. A series of four(4) two-hour workshops will take place on Saturdays or another alternative day. Workshops will address the following topics: encouraging your child to read at home, supporting your child before and after state exams, understanding the Next Generation Learning Standards, Understanding the NYSESLAT exam and its components. Four parent 3 hour workshops will be given throughout the year. The workshops will be given in English and Spanish along with materials translated in the languages that parents indicated on our survey that was filled out by parents in the beginning of the year. Parent workshops will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal and ENL teachers, coaches or other staff members who 2018-19 CEP 51 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities work closely with ENLS. The topics of the workshop are determined by parent interest and student needs. Parents and students will participate in interactive learning experiences that are designed to support the academic, physical, social, and emotional needs of the student. Some of the topics include nutrition, test taking strategies and studying strategies, organization tips, and stress coping strategies. Records and agendas will be maintained by the Assistant Principal and the ENL teachers. Agendas are set by teachers through a needs assessment attained by data being collected on the students and a survey given to parents to identify interests. The Parent Coordinator and PTA parent volunteers will be responsible for reaching out to parents. Parents will also be notified via Principal blasts. ENL teachers will send home notifications to parents in the parents native language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 30 School Name The Louis Armstrong Middle School School Number 227 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Helen Ponella Coach Judy Ryan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Kiesel Teacher/Subject Area Kim Hirsch Teacher/Subject Area Karen Ponzo / ELA Related-Service Provider Lucy Ragucci Superintendent Dr. Philip Composto Assistant Principal Kim Sanders Coach Jennifer Collins School Counselor Randi Depalo Parent Alyssa Avia Parent Coordinator Debbie Cataldo Field Support Center Staff Member Nancy Di Maggio Other (Name and Title) Sue Benjamin- School Aide C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1587 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 63 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 NA 7 NA 8 NA 9 10 11 12 NA NA NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? After reviewing data from the NYSESLAT Exam the following was revealed: 23.75% tested out of ENL, 8 sixth graders, 4 seventh graders and 2 eight graders. The number of students in the emerging and transitioning levels include 2 emerging students in 6th grade and 1 emerging student in 7th grade . 5 transitioning students in 6th grade and 3 in 7th grade and 2 in 8th grade.Targeted intervention programs for our ENL's in academic areas is based on data from both formative and summative exams. Students receive instruction through a ENL delivery model( English as a new language model) in which students receive core content area (i.e. English language arts, math , science and social studies) from two certified teachers. Students are grouped based on their reading lexile levels and linguistic readiness. . Data is used to help teachers group students to address their linguistic and academic needs.This school year students will participate in an after school enrichment program once a week. Four weekend workshops will be offered to ENL students and their parents 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Targeted help in the four modalities of language acquisition will be provided to address students' individual needs, based on the data found in the RLAT report. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of the ENL program by measuring and evaluating the students' baseline reading lexile level, along with data gathered from the ELA and NYSESLAT exams as measured during different intervals throughout the school year. Formative assessments and summative assessments, pre and post unit assessments and mid year assessments are used to identify progress. Learning targets are broken down as a means to scaffold instruction and identify specific sub-skills for improvement. Additionally, The ENL New York State Periodic Assessment is administered once in the Fall and once in the Spring to help determine strengths and challenges in language acquisition and test taking skills. Visuals, glossaries, bilingual dictionaries are some of the methods used to address the students' native language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During the end of each marking period, teachers have students reflect on their learning and help them establish next steps and goals. Data from predictive exams and lexile levels help teachers and students keep track of their goals and mastery of skills.Students with academic needs are placed in academic intervention services to receive additional interventions as embedded in students schedules. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Response to Intervention (RTI) is a multi-tiered approach to help struggling learners. Students' progress is closely monitored at each stage of intervention to determine the need for further intervention. As a result teachers and students set learning goals and targets in the "I can form"to determine areas of need and to monitor progress in meeting specific learning targets. Teachers engaged in weekly team meetings to implement action plans for students both academically and behavior skills with a focus on the lowest 1/3. We began by separating students into grade bands. We chose to test students in small groups of 18. Two proctors administered each part pf the exam simultaneously with 18 students in each class. Students were allocated three periods in which to finish part 1, 2 and 3 of the NYSESLAT. No more than one part of the test was administered in one day. Each student took the Reading, Writing and Listening parts of the exam over the period of three days. All students were able to finish the exam with time to spare and were told that if they needed more time, they could have it. All students were tested for speaking in a private and quiet room on an individual basis. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing data from the NYSESLAT Exam the following was revealed: 23.75% tested out of ENL, 8 sixth graders, 4 seventh graders and 2 eighth graders. The number of students in the emerging and transitioning levels include 2 emerging students in 6th grade and 1 emerging student in 7th grade . 5 transitioning students in 6th grade and 3 in 7th grade and 2 in 8th grade. Students scored higher in speaking and listening than reading and writing modalities. Results from the NYS ELA state exam, baseline and performance series predictive exams that measure reading and writing lexile levels revealed that students continue to exhibit deficiencies in analyzing non-fiction and informational texts. Based on the analysis from informal class assessments students are having difficulty identifying theme, mood, tone and overall deep analysis of synthesizing information. Intermediate and Beginning students are having difficulty integrating academic vocabulary in their speaking and writing as well as having a clear understanding of the meaning. They are familiar and can use Tier 1 words but lack understanding and usage of Tier 2 and Tier 3 words. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher teams meet twice a month to discuss individual students' progress. The academic and behavior chart is used as a tool to memorialize student progress and is shared with teachers from different content areas. Teachers look for trends in 2018-19 CEP 55  academic areas and provide interventions as necessary. Pupil path and Remind me applications are being used by both parents and teachers to increase communication between the home and school community. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. Instruction is delivered in a number of ways to our students depending upon their specific mandates, skills, and learning styles. I.S. 227 provides an ENL instructional program in an integrated collaborative teaching model. The ENL teacher collaborates with the general education teacher as a push-in teacher in different content areas. Learning is supported by several strategies that individualize and scaffold instruction tailored to the students' academic and linguistic needs based on analysis of the NYSESLAT modality scores. Resources include bilingual dictionaries and glossaries and computer based language acquisition programs, which are incorporated into weekly class activities. ENLs receive instruction from a New York State certified ENL teacher. All of our 5th-8th grade ENLs receive services through a push-in model. The ESL teacher pushes into ELA, Social Studies, Math or Science classes 4 or 8 times weekly according to the proficiency level of students. A large majority(79%)of students receiving push-in services scored advanced on the NYSESLAT and received 4 periods per week of push-in services. Students who require 8 classes per week receive a combination of push-in and pull-out services. All ENLs receive English Language Arts Instruction from a certified General Education Teacher, using various ENL strategies. It is the mission of our school is to promote academic success for our students along with their social and physical development and language acquisition. This will make them lifelong learners in both English and their native language. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: NA c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students who have scored Transitioning or Expanding on the NYSESLAT will receive 180 instructional minutes(4 periods) per week with a certified ENL teacher using a push-in model. Students who scored Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT will receive 360 instructional minutes(8 classes) per week with a certified ENL teacher using either a push-in or pull-out model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our teachers have been trained in Carol Dweck's Brainology Fixed Vs Growth Mindset. Teachers work with students to ensure that they are confident learners and empower them to use their strengths in to succeed and look at their weaknesses as a challenge. Instructional strategies and materials are used by classroom teachers to address the needs of all students in class. Curriculum include:Expeditionary Learning Language Arts Program, Connected Mathematics Program 3, Materials include English Yes-beginning to advance levels, multi-level libraries, bilingual dictionaries, Scholastic Trio Theme based learning in Social Studies, Science and Language Arts – grades 5 & 6, English to Use, All Write Program, Long man Bilingual 2018-19 CEP 56  dictionaries, Strengthening: Reading, Listening, Note taking and Writing – levels 6, 7, 8, English Benchmark Assessments, grades 5-8 and various to improve reading, vocabulary, language and math skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers will assess newcomers in both languages if they are classified as emerging or transitioning students in language development in their native language. Teachers share and compare both formative and summative data in different content areas to identify trends and patterns in literacy skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE - N/A b. Newcomer Newcomer students are placed in small groups in the classroom and the teacher uses baseline data to determine level of functioning as well as readiness for the activity. Students are given the opportunity to use glossaries, watch native language videos and are paired with a stronger learner who will at times translate in the students native language. Instructional differentiation is provide in many ways. multiple entry points include leveled textbooks and articles, videos, laptops, pictures, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. c. Developing - We are unsure who "Developing" refers to d, Long Term ENLs Our long term ENLs continue to receive some supports in their native language and integration into the school community. Some strategies used to address language acquisition are to incorporate heritage language development with strategies such as using cognates to better understand content and using peers and google translate to tap into prior knowledge in the first language to make connections in the second language. Intensive coaching in reading comprehension, incorporate culturally and linguistically relevant instruction and provide opportunities for students to engage in academic discussions about content area concepts and texts with support from peers and teachers. e. Former ENLs Former ENLS receive academic language support, in order to further develop grade level reading and writing comprehension as well as advance their writing skills and foster social,emotional and academic independence. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The Wilson Reading program is used by ISS teachers who have ENL students in their class. Also, toolboxes that include step by step instructions for various literacy skills to create independent learning. Some strategies used to provide academic content support include but are not limited to; cloze reading passages, re-word the text of the reading assignment in simple phrases; embedded hints or reminders in the text; using real life experiences when discussing the reading material; tests are read orally; pairing ENL students with monolingual speaking peers in small groups; using manipulative; hands-on aids; using audio books; providing native language support to the student in the classroom; break work into smaller pieces and do task analysis; provide visuals to support academic work; encourage re-reading of tasks/instructions; and provide more time to finish assignments/tests. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 57  In math, science, ELA and Social Studies classes students are grouped according to the results from unit pre and post tests. Teachers design instruction to differentiate and offer multiple entry points to allow all students to attain grade level proficiency. Transitional support is given to former ENLs twice weekly as CR part 154 regulations require. Students who tested out in Spring 2017 and Spring 2018 NYSESLAT exam are supported with various strategies, modifications and learning tools that foster independence. Modifications for all formative and summative assessments are given if necessary such as state exams in the students' native language. Learning tools include class reference sheets and tool kits available to aid in the writing and reading process. A majority of our former ENLS attend ELA class with our active ENL student groups. We focus on pushing students to the next level by giving them extensions and challenges to do when class work is finished before the end of class. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8. Targeted intervention programs for our ENLs in ELA, Math and other content areas are provided during the school day and during our Title III Afterschool Academy. AIS is offered in both ELA and Math. Students are placed in these programs based on their performance in class and lexile levels. ELA Classes are taught in English only. Interventions for Science and Social Studies are addressed through literacy in an AIS program. Tasks are broken down into small chunks. Students engage in self reflection during daily lessons to manage their learning goals. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After analyzing data from the state ELA and NYSESLAT exams, it was noted that ENL's continue to need support in reading grade level text and writing. Interventions include grouping students in after school enrichment programs according to their language needs. Weekend enrichment classes for parents and students will be offered during the school year. Topics include literacy goals, study tips, test taking tips, relating well between family members, expressing yourself, managing finances, and nutrition as well as other workshop subjects requested by parents and students. Students also receive targeted instruction during the day and are programmed in AIS classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to attend after school programs, extra curricular activities and early bird activities such as art, music, Champs sports program and student organization. Announcements are made during AM homeroom, fliers are sent home and information appears on our school web site as well as our school calendar. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Laptops, dictionaries and thesaurus' are provided for translation if needed. Students often use mini-whiteboards, manipulatives and graphic organizers to support learning. Teachers also use document cameras, smart boards and content related pictures/photos for visual support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL - N/A TBE - N/A ENL - Home language support is assessed and delivered as needed to all ENL students in the form of bilingual glossaries, dictionaries, study guides and ELA Novels. Students who require further bilingual support may be allowed to write in their home language in order to aid second language acquisition. Home language support is assessed during Parent Program Selection Orientation in September. At that time we identify which parents need translated materials and in which language. We also assess which form of communication(i.e. text, email, or 2018-19 CEP 58  phone call) they prefer to be contacted in. We also utilize Blackboard Connect to contact parents individually as well as send out group notifications. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL students receive services according to CR 154 regulations by grade and proficiency level. All students are required to meet grade level standards and are provided with grade level texts and supports to meet their individual learning targets. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A - We do not share a building with other schools 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Student orientation takes place in August to ensure that all new students receive information needed to start off the school year. Parents are invited to the Parent Program Selection Orientation in September. Curriculum night is offered to all students and parents in September. The Parent Coordinator is available to give individual and group tours of the school. Students are paired up with class buddies to make sure they have someone whom they can share class notes and discuss class expectations and upcoming events. The counselor visits classrooms to introduce herself/himself as a support person outside of the classroom. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish Language class is offered to all 7th and 8th grade students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development is an integral component of our school’s mission statement. Workshops, staff development meetings and common teacher prep periods for ENL teachers ensure that ENL students receive the academic/educational accommodations they are entitled to. Teachers receive professional learning in house and are encouraged to attend workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners. Paraprofessional and support personnel attend weekly professional learning in house. Topics include: differentiated instruction, social emotional well being, how to engage students in learning, and school safety protocols. ENL teachers attend professional development by DOE and OELLS throughout the year. 2. Teacher training includes ENL methodologies and strategies taught by a state certified ENL teacher as outlined in CR Part 154. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the required 15% ENL specific training through our weekly professional learning cycles. Agendas reflect ENL specific topics such as : how to develop academic vocabulary in both written language and conversations, and making connections between prior knowledge and academic content. ENL teachers work collaboratively with content area teachers and attend workshops specific to ENL topics. New teacher workshops are offered as well as training for content area teachers who teach ENLs. A minimum of 7.5 hours of training is offered to all newly hired teachers as per Jose P. regulations. Our ESL teachers facilitate the training on site. Teachers are also encouraged to participate in Network PDs and workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners. The ENL teacher attends weekly team meetings and department ELA meetings to discuss students. Teachers are encouraged to participate in ENL training and QTEL in content areas. Title III after school workshops are conducted to address best practices. Some of the topics discussed at these workshops include: identifying English Language Learners in the classroom, addressing the needs of individual students through small group instruction, What is the NYSESLAT exam and how is it aligned with the ELA New York State Standards? In addition, teachers will receive technology training to better incorporate technology into daily lessons. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the beginning of the year a mandated ENL meeting is conducted to communicate program and language development goals to parents. Parents are encouraged to attend Meet the Teacher Night, Parent teacher conferences and parent workshops offered on Saturdays and before PTA meetings. Teachers invite parents and students to meet on Tuesdays from 2:45-4:00 p.m. for individual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents and guardians of students attending I.S. 227 will have the opportunity to attend workshops on Nutrition, Finance, Literacy, test taking skills and NYSESLAT preparation. Breakfast, and metro cards will be available to these parents. Parents and guardians are also invited to attend monthly P.T.A. meetings. Parent workshops will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal of ENL, the Instructional Coach, and ENL/Parent Coordinators. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents during the August orientation and distributes survey forms. Parents also complete the school environment survey. Parents are invited to act as chaperons and volunteers for all of our school trips and extracurricular activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. To assess our school’s written and oral translation services, data is compiled from ATS reports, information found on students’ emergency home contact cards and cumulative student records. Written and oral translation of documents is provided based on the predominant languages present in the school. In addition, translation of documents is provided by the Region and the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 for individual meetings. 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Helen Ponella, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Louis Armstrong Middle school School DBN: 30q227 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Helen Ponella Title Principal Kim Sanders Assistant Principal Debbie Cataldo Parent Coordinator Maria Benenati ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alyssa Avia Rose Izzo Parent Teacher/Subject Area Karen Ponzo Teacher/Subject Area Judy Ryan Jennifer Collins Coach Coach Randy Depalo School Counselor Dr. Philip Composto Nancy D'Maggio Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jessica Kiesel Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30 School Name: 227 Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Judith Alberto Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school’s written and oral translation services, data is compiled from ATS reports, information found on students’ emergency home contact cards and cumulative student records. Written and oral translation of documents is provided based in the predominant languages present in the school. In addition, translation of documents is provided by the Region and the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. The predominant languages spoken in our school are Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Urdu and Arabic. The Parent Coordinator works closely with the Administration, Teachers, Parent Volunteers, and ESL Coordinator to ensure that translation services are provided as needed. Information is disseminated during monthly P.T.A. meetings, through letters and fliers sent home, school mailings, via the internet, the Schools’ website and through the automated messenger service. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish, French, Urdu, English Spanish, French, Urdu, English 55% English English 55% Spanish 36% Spanish, Spanish 36% French 1% French, French 1% Urdu 1% Urdu, Urdu 1% Chinese, Chinese, Chinese 2% Chinese, Chinese 2% Korean, Arabic Russian Spanish French Chinese Korean 1% Korean, Korean 1% Arabic 3% Arabic Arabic 3% Russian 1% Spanish 36% French 1% Chinese 3% Russian Spanish French Chinese Russian 1% Spanish36% French 1% Chinese 3% Korean, Arabic Russian Spanish French Chinese 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document Name: Monthly as needed Staff members are given documents in a timely manner to translate 2018-19 CEP 65  -ENL Parent Orientation Invitation - September -Program Selection Form - September -3 parent workshops, November, January and March Translation services for written documents are done in-house. The diversity of our staff enables our school to utilize the services of Bilingual Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and Parent Volunteers for translation. Documents are printed in English and the native languages of the parents. Documents are distributed in classes where they are needed. Teachers and staff members are also encouraged to use the Department of Education translation services as needed. Program Selection Form - September Monthly Staff Members and Parent Coordinator Translation services for written documents are done in-house. Monthly Calendar, Memos, School Notices Monthly as Needed by Staff Members and Parent Coordinator 3 parent workshops, November, January and March 3 times per year Staff members and Parent Coordinator 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide -ENL Parent Orientation - September. -Curriculum night-Sept. -Individual parent conferences on Tuesdays -Parent Teacher conferences 4X throughout the school year. Weekly (on Tuesdays) and monthly meetings are conducted throughout the school year to ensure that parents are able to communicate directly with teachers. interpretation service(s)? We provide translation devices to parents who request them, and staff members are on site to interpret. 2018-19 CEP 66  Individual parent conferences on Tuesdays Tuesday throughout the year Parent Teacher conferences 4X throughout the school year. 4 times per year Orientation - September. -Curriculum night-Sept. September We provide translation devices to parents who request them, and staff members are on site to interpret. We provide translation devices to parents who request them, and staff members are on site to interpret. We provide translation devices to parents who request them, and staff members are on site to interpret. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize Blackboard Connect to disseminate important information. The website translates all messages into the parents' preferred language. We utilize our bilingual staff and known point people who can call and communicate directly with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent coordinators and other key school-based staff are able to provide language access to all parents who request translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator along with Language Access Coordinator meet regularly to ensure that translation services are available to our parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 67  Our Principal sends out a weekly informational blast to inform parents of upcoming events using Blackboard Connect. Messages are translated in the parents native language as listed in ATS. The Principal monitors parents' language needs during PTA meetings in the beginning and middle of the school year to adjust translation services as needed. 2018-19 CEP 68 
