2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q228 School Name: P.S. 228 EARLY CHILDHOOD MAGNET SCHOOL OF THE ARTS Principal: OLGA GUZMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 228 343000010228 PK - 2 School Number (DBN): 30Q228 32-65 93 rd Street East Elmhurst, NY 11369 718 899-5799 718 899-7323 Phone Number: Fax: Olga Iris Guzman oguzman@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Olga Iris Guzman Iris Rios EstelaMartinez Eileen Hughes MarisolCastellano NA NA District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North – 5 th Floor pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 391-8323 Phone Number: 718 391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Olga Iris Guzmán Iris Rios EstelaMartinez NA MarisolCastellano NA NA NA Eileen Hughes Esther Ascencio *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Madelyn Guzman Member/Teacher MarisolCastellano MichelleMaggi InesSoriano SaidElattab Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The P.S. 228Q educational family, consisting of administrators, teachers, parents and children, will work together at school and at home to realize our belief that all children will meet the performance standards and achieve Academic excellence. The mission of the P.S. 228Q educational family is to create a nurturing child-centered environment with a comprehensive, developmentally appropriate, standards-based curriculum to maximize the intellectual, social-emotional and physical growth of all of our children. Together, we foster a love of learning and the creative arts through differentiated instruction. We celebrate the uniqueness of each child by integrating all subject areas with a wealth of literature, music, original poetry, dramatic performance arts and the visual arts. Our comprehensive 2018-19 CEP 9  curriculum infused with Science and Technology experiences (STEM) to prepare our children for college and future careers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 1. CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION: PS 228Q PS 228 Queens is a high-achieving early childhood school in District 30 whose mission is to educate children in a nurturing, developmentally appropriate, specialized Early Childhood learning environment. By immersing pre-k-2 students in engaging Standards-based academic programs, creative arts experiences and values education, PS 228 teachers educate the whole child and help each child develop a curiosity for learning. The school, currently serving 273 Economically Disadvantaged students, 143 General Education students, 155 ENL (English as a New Language) students, and 75 students with IEP’s, has achieved consecutive years of high academic achievement scores and NYCDOE progress report scores of “A” for more than 10 years! The school has earned awards and commendations such as a “School of Excellence” award, a Respect for All commendation and a Cahn Fellowship for high achieving schools with outstanding leadership. During 2015-2016, PS 228 received a commendation because our English as a New Language (ENL) population outperformed ENL groups in other school within District 30. PS 228 Dual Language programs and bilingual integrated co-teaching pre-kindergarten classes serve as models for teaching and learning in District 30. High expectations for students and parents are communicated through Principal’s Honor Roll, Student of the Month, Science Fair and other curriculum celebrations. Our graduates have demonstrated continued success, winning scholarships to prestigious academic institutions such as NYU, Vassar, and Columbia University. PS 228 educators offer Standards-based learning experiences in a specialized, early childhood learning environment for approximately 300 students in grades Pre-K-2. Children delight in 228’s intimate setting and nurturing learning environment! Monolingual, Dual Language, ESL, Integrated Co-teaching, and self-contained special education class structures meet the diverse learning needs of all of our students. Young children feel comfortable in this family-oriented environment receiving small group and individual instruction to achieve grade-specific Standards. Our school’s Data Team tracks student achievement through progress monitoring to ensure academic growth. Academic support is available for students requiring Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Response to Intervention (RTI). Virtual Y also offers academic support by providing after school homework help and other activities. School Enrichment Model options for all students, including those who meet or exceed grade level standards, include Art, cooking, Glee Club and other enrichment classes. Children participate in PS 228’s Reading and Writing Workshops, word study, non-fiction thematic studies in Science and Social Studies, and project based learning incorporating technology. Math instruction encompasses all Mathematics strands, with an emphasis on problem solving and explaining work products and processes. Writing projects include Narrative units of study, non-fiction “All About” books, and Text-Based writing. During Literacy instruction, Children read leveled texts, big books, e books and class-created charts. Classrooms are equipped with leveled libraries, Smart Boards and learning stations. Children participate in a mini lesson, small group guided instruction and strategy work. Students engage in project based learning and focused conversations. Teachers have individual conferences with students to provide feedback about academic strengths and next steps. Hands-on Science includes a “Four Seasons” inquiry, a “Life Cycle” study, and an introduction to gardening. The PS 228 Green Garden created in 2014-2015 as part of a STEM grant, involves children and their parents in planting, harvesting and healthy eating. Children and parents harvest radishes, arugula, zucchini, and are enthusiastic about these early lessons in sustainability! 2018-19 CEP 10  Project-based learning is the highlight of the Social Studies curriculum, since students make memorable projects such as family trees, cultural research projects, multicultural feasts and thematic dioramas. Students research facts and information and use tech programs such as word or power point to create presentations. Reader’s Theater, Visual Art, Music, and Poetry are incorporated in all subject areas, since cross-curricular multi-disciplinary learning provides entry points and allows all learners to access the curriculum. As a school focused on the Arts, our innovative Artist and Composer of the Month programs target skills instruction as well as cultural literacy. Partnerships with the renowned 92 nd Street Y Music Teachers in residence and VTS (Visual Thinking Strategies) consultants provide opportunities for trips and other enrichment activities. Weekly theater and multicultural dance class also inspire our budding artists, as do storytelling contests, an annual Cervantes poetry celebration, spelling bees and interactive puppet shows. The PS 228 parent community is an integral part of PS 228’s success. Strong parent involvement includes active participation in the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and School Leadership Team (SLT). The Learning Leaders program enables parent volunteers to help in the classroom. The Parent Gardening Club, the Arts and Decorations Committee, Feast and Celebration Planners, and Family Room Team are equally active and supportive. The PS 228 Parent Coordinator has over 10 years of experience collaborating with teachers and parents to offer workshops, resources, and ongoing parental support. Ms. Olga Guzmán, the original founding principal of PS 228, leads a collaborative staff of 27 educators, some who are also original staff members. Licensed Early Childhood educators plan and implement instruction at PS 228. The staff includes an Assistant Principal, teachers, educational assistants, instructional coaches and facilitators, IEP and ESL Coordinators and a school- based support team comprised of Speech therapists, an occupational therapist, a physical therapist and a school psychologist. PS 228 educators embrace its ethnically diverse student population and work collaboratively to meet their academic, social and emotional needs. Supportive Environment PS 228 teachers aim to strengthen the Supportive school environment as described in the "Framework For Great Schools" by developing cooperative class communities that encourage good citizenship and collaborative learning. During 2017 - 2018, K - 2 classes will continue to participate in learning experiences such as morning meetings, class conversations, and partner talk that foster positive attitudes and respect in the classroom. PS 228's K - 2 Values Curriculum will continue to shape the community, focusing on pro-social behaviors such as kindness, honesty, generosity, and forgiveness. Children will learn and practice the attitudes and behaviors valued by the PS 228 community. Other strategies utilized in the PS 228 community to foster a supportive nurturing school environment include Principal's Honor Roll, monthly awards for good citizenship, and opportunities to be class helpers and class ambassadors. Effective School Leadership During the 2017 - 2018 school year, the PS 228 Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher Leaders worked closely with the Superintendent to analyze data, identify and clarify school goals, and to engage in self-assessment to identify next steps in teaching and learning. This strong partnership will continue during 2018-2019 to continue a strong pattern of student achievement. Principal Guzmán and a team of lead teachers were nominated and selected to participate in the Cahn Fellows Program. This program supports and challenges distinguished educational leaders who have demonstrated achievement and outstanding leadership by focusing on an ongoing collaborative project or school inquiry for continuous improvement. The team initiated a parent involvement project that increased parent participation in 2018-19 CEP 11  Spring 2017 and 2018 parent workshops and events. This project will be developed and refined as the action plan for a continuous improvement in Strong Family and Community Ties during the upcoming school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2. STUDENT POPULATIONS: NEEDS The PS 228 school community includes the following student populations: ● Pre-k-2 nd grade students enrolled in general education classes. ● Pre-k-2 nd grade students with IEP’s enrolled in Monolingual and Bilingual Integrated Co-Teaching classes and K-2 nd grade students in Self Contained Special Education Class settings. ● K-2 nd grade Language Learners participating in Dual Language class settings learning to become literate in 2 languages: English and Spanish. ● Spanish dominant students in grades pre-k-2 enrolled in Bilingual class settings. ● Students receiving ESL support according to mandated ESL Through the Arts instruction. All student groups need rigorous (CCLS) Standards-based differentiated instruction in Reading, Writing, Word Study, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. PS 228 educators meet the needs of all students through assessment-based differentiated instruction. Flexible groups participate in larger group, small group and individualized instruction throughout the day according to each student’s needs. According to 2017-2018 school data ( PPO, Quality Review, Needs Assessments) our pre-k-2 students need multiple entry points for individual lessons that engage all students in learning across subjects and progress monitoring to move forward in English Language Arts, Mathematics and other subjects. Students also need balanced literacy instruction including oral language instruction, shared reading, guided reading and learning stations that encourage children to develop comprehension through conversation. These findings are consistent with Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data indicating that PS 228 English Language Learners need support with oral language. The comprehensive data review for our school also revealed a need for ongoing assessment and feedback to help identify strengths and next steps in instruction. Mandated services address the needs of students with IEP’s by developing skills such as receptive and expressive language development, word identification and Reading comprehension. Our IEP teacher coordinates mandated services for Students With IEP’s consist of individualized sessions with licensed service providers including speech therapists, an occupational therapist, a physical therapist, a social worker and a school psychologist. In some cases, academic needs of students with IEP’s are met by providing individualized flexible programming. Mandated services for ENL’s may include specific class placements including ENL Through the Arts taught by licensed ESL teachers. PS 228 teachers meet the needs of ENL’s in Bilingual and Dual Language class settings by providing instruction in Spanish and English. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3. CONTINUOUS PROGRESS: THE FRAMEWORK FOR GREAT SCHOOLS 2018-19 CEP 12  Rigorous Instruction 2017-2018 curricular programs to be continued during 2018-2019 reflect continuous progress in “Rigorous Instruction”. Rigorous programs and initiatives for K-2 students include an increase in the number of non-fiction units of study and thematic content area learning, a focus on project-based learning across subjects, and multiple entry points incorporating all modalities and learning styles to meet the needs of all of our learners. During Spring 2017, the ESL Team attained a grant to expand the PS 228 Dual Language program, adding a second Dual Language Kindergarten class to the class roster. In 2016-2019, The Dual Language Kindergarten class will focus on language learning, enabling the target group of Kindergarten students to attain proficiency in both languages. Pre-k teachers increased project-based experiential learning evidenced by the newly implemented Work Sampling System. The Pre-k Team will continue this work during 2018-2019, maximizing hours and intensity of pre-k instruction through full day pre-k classes. PS 228 teachers aim to strengthen the supportive school environment as described in the “Framework For Great Schools” by continuing intensive progress monitoring of all students. We have made tremendous progress in this area by monitoring the Reading progress of struggling readers weekly and biweekly. By implementing AIS and RTI instruction for 50 minutes three times per week, struggling readers received intensive support and all program participants progressed by 3 or more levels measured by June 2016 Reading Assessments/running records. Based on high achievement data, this program will be continued and refined during 2018-2019. PS 228 educators planned and implemented lessons with multiple entry points to meet the needs of all learners including ENL’s and students with IEP’s. Multiple entry points were noted in teacher observations and learning walks. This work will be refined and expanded in the upcoming school year. One school goal for 2017-2018 was to support all learners including ENL’s and Students With IEP’s, by “increasing multiple entry points” in teaching and learning. This goal will continue to enhance our supportive help our students achieve. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q228 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 314 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 20 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 8 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 85.0% % Reduced Lunch 49.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 88.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 17.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 94.0% 4.5% 23.6% 1.0% 5.4% 1.6% 2 17% 5.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School achievement data shows that our students performed well on spring 2017 MOSLs, evidenced by 20 of 21 achievement points and score of “highly effective” rating earned on the MOSL feedback report and the principal’s evaluation/PPO report. High achievement in ESL is evidenced by District reports indicating that PS 228 English Language Learners outperformed ENLs in other schools and data reflecting 94% of ELL’s made progress in English Language Acquisition. Current school data reveals that 42% of PS 228 students are English Language Learners who receive Dual Language, Bilingual or ESL instruction and 19% are students with IEPs in Integrated Co-teaching or self-contained special education class settings. The needs assessment administered to the PS 228 staff during 2017-2018 also reflects a need for additional focus on designing and implementing lessons that include learning stations for diverse learners. Learning stations provide many opportunities for learners with diverse learning styles to engage in instruction and connect with new learning. PS 228 School data shows a 350-student population in early childhood grades, 46.6% of the total population of ENL’s and 14% with IEP’s, revealing a large population of learners with diverse learning needs who would benefit from learning experiences with differentiated learning stations. School data including the Principal’s Performance Observation (PPO) report and the most recent NYCDOE Quality Review findings also indicate a need for lessons with differentiated learning stations to engage all children in rigorous learning experiences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, K-2 students will improve Advanced Literacy skills by participating in CCLS aligned Reading stations as measured by at least 75% of students achieving on or above level scores on the June 2019 Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Learning Team will research Early Childhood Reading Stations incorporating multisensory Learning Strategies. Professional Learning Team will gather educational resources for implementing early childhood learning stations and differentiated reading tasks to engage students. Teachers will collaboratively create reading stations and differentiated lesson plans using Danielson Framework and CCLS to guide planning. Teachers will implement lessons and learning stations, and reflect on their practice. Pairs of teachers will engage in inter-visitation using the Danielson rubric as an observation tool to reflect on the use of early childhood reading stations. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-2 teachers in Collaborative Grade Groups/Teams September 2018- December 2019 Dual Language Team IEP Teacher Team K-2 teachers in Collaborative Grade Groups/Teams Dual Language Team IEP Teacher Team October 2018- June 2019 December 2018- January 2019 And ongoing Coaches, facilitators, IEP and ESL Coordinators Grade Leaders Principal Assistant Principal Coaches, facilitators, IEP and ESL Coordinators Grade Leaders Principal Assistant Principal Teachers administer MOSL pre and post assessments, data review and analysis. K-2 students Fall 2018 *Progress evaluated Formative assessment through class assessments/progress monitoring-revising as necessary & Spring 2019 Coaches, facilitators, IEP and ESL Coordinators Grade Leaders Principal Teachers group students for instruction and reading stations in flexible assessment based groups. K-2 students Assistant Principal September 2018-June 2019 Coaches, facilitators, IEP and ESL Coordinators 2018-19 CEP 16 October 2018-June 2019 Grade Leaders Principal Assistant Principal Students participate in Common Core-aligned Literacy instruction through the use of learning stations for differentiated student groups Teachers plan and implement parent involvement activities such as workshops, curriculum nights, individual / small group progress monitoring, conferences to increase parental awareness of CCLS, learning stations and Advanced Literacy to improve home support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Between September 2018 and June 2019, PS 228 Teachers, the Parent Coordinator, and the School Leadership Team will plan and implement Parent workshops on Reading Stations, Advanced Literacy, developing conversations and balanced literacy strategies. Parents will visit the school to observe and interact with their children in Reading Stations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers will be hired to facilitate pre and post assessments and progress monitoring. We will purchase professional resources including books, chart paper, multi-sensory learning materials, etc. Schedule adjustments will be made to facilitate professional learning activities, inter-visitations and common planning periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring is done continuously during the school year using: TCRWP assessments and Fountas and Pinnell Assessments. Teachers will administer midpoint progress monitoring during the second week in February 2019 to measure the school’s progress towards meeting the annual goal. 90% of K-2 students participating in rigorous Literacy instruction with Reading stations and multiple entry points will progress 1 - 2 levels on TCRWP and Fountas & Pinnell assessments. February 2019 Progress monitoring data indicates that more than 85% of K-2 students participating in literacy stations have progressed 1 or more levels on the midyear Fountas and Pinnell Literacy assessments. Data-based 2018-19 CEP 17  planning indicates that our students have made good progress toward meeting the projected benchmark by June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We utilize the following assessments to measure student progress: Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessment, Progess monitoring running records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of our school programs and schedules, as compared to the Academic Policy guidelines, and Developmentally Appropriate Practice for Early Childhood, reveals a need to provide increased opportunities for all of our students to engage in Physical Education, and playful activities and lessons, to support the development of positive social emotional development and the strong social and communication skills that will ensure success as students move up the grades leading to college and career readiness. The 2017-2018 Chancellor's initiative is to promote health and wellness of students by launching Physical Education programs in all N.Y.C. Public Schools. In addition to this, research shows that there has been a recent increase in childhood obesity. Increasing opportunities for students to move and to play and become physically active is likely to promote student engagement and motivation, resulting in improved health and wellness for all of our students. Our school Wellness Grant will benefit our school community as we continue with our first year of implementation. Initial data collected during Spring 2018 shows improved physical fitness and high levels of student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 228 educators will implement a K-2 physical education program to improve health and wellness of students as measured by 90% of students improving in 2 or more components of the June 2019 fitnessgram. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Educational Assistants and School Aides will engage in professional development focused on Physical education, health and wellness. All Staff Members September 2018 - June 2019 PS 228 Wellness Council including licensed Physical Education Teacher. Schedules will be created that ensure adequate time for students to engage in physical education classes and (PE), P.E. clubs. Schedules will include Physical Education 2 times per week for all students. Students,All Staff Members September 2018 - June 2019 PS 228 Professional Development Team Teachers and Paraprofessionals will engage in planning for positive participation in Games, activities, health and wellness. All Staff Members September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and School Aides will engage in professional development targeting Physical Education and other relevant topics. All Staff Members September 2018 - June 2019 Wellness Council including Licensed Physical Education teacher Wellness Council including Licensed Physical Education teacher, District Leaders and NYCDOE Presenters PS 228 will implement grade-wide Family Enrichment programs and Family Club activities hosted by the professional learning team and the School Leadership Team to promote interest and family involvement in active games and sports, health and wellness. Families: Parents and Students January, March, June 2019 PS 228 School Leadership Team Members, PS 228 Wellness Council, Fitnessgram data review and family survey will be administered to parents at the end of March to assess progress. Wellness Council will pursue grants and professional learning opportunities for the PS 228 school community. Students March 2019 PS 228 Physical Parent Coordinator Education teacher and Wellness Council Professional Development Team and Wellness Council Members Students, Fall 2018, Families January-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 20 The PS 228 Physical Education Curriculum and fitness project will be implemented through weekly lessons and learning experiences. Students, Families January-June 2019 Licensed Physical Education teacher and members of the PS 228 Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During Fall 2018 and Spring 2019, the parent coordinator, the teachers and the School Leadership team will implement grade-wide Family health and wellness programs and Family Physical Education activities to extend learning and develop interests at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers will be hired to facilitate programs and workshops. We will purchase Physical education materials including balls, hoops, cones, scooters and other equipment. Books, chart paper, art supplies and other resources will also be purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the Physical Education teacher and the School Wellness Council members will administer Fitnessgram components to assess students' physical fitness. Progress will be monitored across the year, with a final Assessment administered during spring 2018. Parents will take a survey with questions based around "student health and wellness". At staff meetings and parent meetings, presenters will model, share and engage participants in family health and wellness activities. As indicated in the revised action plan, new Physical education programs were added to the curricular program during fall 2017. Family wellness activities were launched by the PS 228 Parent Coordinator, the Wellness Council and School Leadership Team members . This work will continue during 2018-2019 as we complete the first full year of our School Wellness Grant. February/March 2019 Physical Education (PE) data is in process. Currently, the Physical Education Team is working to monitor student progress by collecting height and weight data for all students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  During Fall and spring 2019, the PS 228 Physical education teacher and Wellness council members will administer Fitnessgram Physical education assessment components to K-2 students. Fitnessgram components will be readministered in February 2019 to monitor progress and assess improvements in student health and wellness. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review and PPO data indicates that learning stations observed in K-2 classrooms encouraged active learning, conversation among students, and student engagement in learning. Staff members' observations also indicate student achievement in reading, writing and oral language. This work emerged from a collaborative inquiry on learning stations that involved collaborative planning and sharing best practices among a core group of teachers. During 2016-2017, collaboration among a core group of teachers led to increased student achievement and improved professional collaboration as indicated in our school's most recent Quality review and PPO. For 2018-2019 our need is to increase the use of learning stations in K-2 classrooms and to plan additional data-based Reading stations that will continue to facilitate academic achievement for all students including ENL students and students with IEPs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. K-2 Teachers in the PS 228 Professional Learning Community will collaboratively plan and implement Standards-based Reading stations for 3 or more ELA units resulting in at least 75% of students achieving or exceeding grade level benchmarks on the June 2019 Fountas and Pinnell assessments. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Team will engage in lesson study and collaborative planning of learning stations on a weekly basis. PS 228 Students October 2018-June 2019 Teams of PS 228 educators including: The ongoing assessment process includes: Teachers  Assessing student achievement in reading by administering the TCRWP assessment during September, December, February and June.  Monitoring student progress across the year through the use of running records, observation/conference notes and teacher made assessments.  Creating and using Teacher made checklists/assessments to evaluate learning stations  Teacher feedback and goal setting with Principal, A.P. and other Teacher Leaders. Professional Development Team uses rubrics to assess & analyze student work. Teacher Teams examine student work for strengths and next steps. Professional Development Team will revise and re-teach lessons as necessary, based on the data. Professional Development Team including Principal, Coaches, facilitator, IEP and ESL Coordinator, Lead Teachers, pre-k-2 teachers Students PS 228 Professional Development Team including Principal, Coaches, facilitator, IEP and ESL Coordinator, Principal Assistant Principal Coaches, Facilitators, IEP/ESL Coordinators Lead Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Coaches, Facilitators, IEP/ESL Coordinators Lead Teachers 2018-19 CEP 24  Teachers implement Reading stations and conduct inter-visitations to attain best practices. Assess and revise plans as necessary. Teacher Teams will plan modified Standards based next steps for SWD's, ELL's and students who require support. Teachers will utilize modeling, learning stations and goal planners to show "next steps" in instruction. The Professional Development Team will offer individual and group conferences, parent/child interactive workshops and "family fun nights" to model and practice learning stations that include strategy work, reading and writing, problem solving and conversations. Lead Teachers, pre-k-2 teachers. PS 228 Professional Development Team including Principal, Coaches, facilitator, IEP and ESL Coordinator, Lead Teachers, pre-k-2 teachers. Pre-k-2 students Families Pre-k-2 Students Pre-k-2 Students and Teachers, Principal September 2018 & June 2019 and ongoing. Principal Assistant Principal Coaches, Facilitators, IEP/ESL Coordinators Lead Teachers Teachers October 2018-June 2019 June 2019 Partner teachers, Professional Development Team Members Principal Assistant Principal Pre-k-2 teachers Professional Development Team members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will attend family nights to experience Common Core aligned differentiated lessons and reading stations that meet their children's needs. Parents will observe and interact with their children during learning experiences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers will be hired to facilitate pre and post assessments and progress monitoring. We will purchase professional resources including books, chart paper, multi-sensory learning materials, etc. Schedule adjustments will be made to facilitate professional learning activities, inter-visitations and common planning periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During February 2019, the PS 228 Data Team will review instructional artifacts, (checklists, administrative feedback, and work samples) indicating at least 40% of teachers provided Reading Stations that improves students’ academic progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. During February 2019, the PS 228 Data Team will review instructional artifacts (checklists, Administrative Feedback, and work samples) indicating at least 30% of teachers provided Reading Stations that improves students’ academic progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017 Quality Review and PPO data, PS 228 students showed improvement in using language to build conversations while participatingin literacy and math learning stations. The learning stations engaged k-2 learners including ENL students and students with IEPs in standards-based instruction, and student achievement was noted by reviewers. Analysis of student achievement data and PPO data reveal a need to continue to develop and refine effective and differentiated teaching strategies, especially questioning and discussion techniques, to engage all students, including students with disabilities and ENL students, in rigorous critical thinking and problem solving lessons. PPO data indicates that our school community needs to analyze levels of questioning in the NYSESLAT and incorporate similar questions in the PS 228 Early Childhood curriculum. All of our students need to be immersed in questions and activities that encourage them to make inferences and to explain their thinking when speaking, reading, writing and solving problems. Based on teacher MOTP ratings for 2017-2018, Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3b) was a category that (as an average) our teachers are working to refine. All Teachers engaged in self-assessment using Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and the majority identified Questioning and Discussion Technique (3b) as an area for growth they would focus on developing during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, SBL’s and other members of the PD Team will build teachers’ capacity to Implement effective questioning and class discussions , resulting in a 3% increase in the average percentage of teachers rated effective or highly effective in component 3b:Using Questioning and Discussion techniques on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in professional development using Danielson’s Framework for Teaching with a focus on Domain 3: Instruction and especially 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Teachers will attend and participate in on-site and District professional development that focuses on questioning and discussion techniques that support student discourse and comprehension. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, , Administration, staff developers. All teachers will develop, plan and incorporate Depth of Knowledge questioning and discussion techniques into all subject areas. Teachers A Learning Plan will be collaboratively developed, implemented, and supported through school based and off-site professional development including District Instructional Support Specialists, classroom and school inter visitation, collaborative inquiry, and frequent formative observation and feedback by administration To address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-needs student subgroups, Teacher Teams will develop supportive questioning prompts, charts and “leveled” menus of questions. Language supports will also be provided. Parent engagement activities will include interactive parent-child workshops utilizing questioning, family curriculum nights and family trips incorporating questioning for the children. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, , Administration, staff developers. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, , Administration, staff developers. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, , Administration, staff developers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Between September 2018 and June 2019, the Teachers, the Parent Coordinator and members of the School Leadership Team will promote parent leadership and engagement through workshops in conversationss and questioning to extend conversations and Advanced Literacy skills. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, paraprofessionals, student teachers, and administration; Lead Teacher support; instructional materials including rich fiction and non-fiction content area books aligned to the students reading levels and the units of study, online video and other resources, charts, sentence strips, markers, pocket charts, etc.; per diem funding for substitute teachers, as well as weekly schedule adjustments to accommodate teacher on and off-site study and classroom and school inter-visitation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-February 2019 65% of teachers will achieve a rating of effective or higher in 3B as measured in Advance and at least 60% students will be meeting grade level standards for ELA as measured by Running Records and end of unit assessments. Preliminary data including professional collaboration on the topic of class conversations and oral language indicates that members of the PS 228 professional learning community have demonstrated improved use of conversation and questioning in the classroom. Based on 2018-2019 observation data, teachers utilize conversation prompts, oral language goals and oral language assessments to develop effective questioning and class discussions. Current Advance data indicates that more than 50% of teachers achieved a rating of effective or higher in 3B. Data trends indicate overall progress toward achieving this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure used to assess progress is the ADVANCE teacher observation system component 3b. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our 2016-2017 Quality Review Report in indicator 3.4 is noted as an area of celebration. Many of our families are recent immigrants and 47 percent of our students are identified as English Language Learners. To support student progress and well-being, we need to ensure that parents learn about curriculum and instructional practices and expectations in their native language and that they receive support to help their children learn and make progress in all curriculum areas. It is equally important that all parents know that their culture and language are valued, shared and represented in our school community. Since we dedicate so much time and resources into programs and parent workshop sessions, we would like to see a bigger turnout at parent classroom visits and workshops to help build in the area of Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The PS 228 Professional Learning Team will increase the number of parent workshops by at least 5% to develop parents’ knowledge of early childhood curriculum including Reading Stations and Balanced Literacy, measured by a 5% increase in 2018-2019 agendas, attendance and workshop reflections. 2018-19 CEP 30 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cross Grade Curriculum Teams of Teachers for Reading, Writing, Math, and the Arts will plan and implement monthly Parent workshops. Each month will focus on a different curriculum area with a focus on BalancedLiteracy. Parents will be invited to an informative and hands on parent workshop created and conducted by Cross Grade Curriculum Team for that area. Bilingual staff members will support parent understanding and answer questions. Monthly Grade Level Parent Newsletters describing the curriculum and instructional events and expectations will be sent home to all parents and posted online. All events, invitations, and reminders are sent to all our parents in their language of choice sent in the child’s folder. Families September 2018 - June 2019 Families September 2018 - June 2019 All teachers, paraprofessionals, office staff, Guidance, Administration, Parent Coordinator All teachers, paraprofessionals, office staff, Guidance, Administration, Parent Coordinator All teachers, paraprofessionals, office staff, Guidance, Administration, Parent Coordinator All teachers, paraprofessionals, office staff, Guidance, Administration, Parent Coordinator Musical and Dance performances by arts teacher and cultural organizations celebrating the variety of cultures in our school will be presented to students, and to parents by invitation, across the year. We will host our annual multicultural event in November where families share food, representative of their culture and the multicultural dance festival in April. Families September 2018 - June 2019 Parent engagement activities will include interactive parent-child workshops incorporating Balanced Literacy strategies, family curriculum nights and family trips incorporating questioning for the children. Families September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 31  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community Based Organizations and other partnerships that support family and community engagement between September 2018 and June 2019 include The Learning Leaders, MONDO, CUNY CAT, Studio in a School and 92nd Street Y. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Interpretation and translation services, instructional and presentation supplies, Teachers, paraprofessionals, student teachers, and administration; per-diem funding for substitute teachers, as well as weekly schedule adjustments to accommodate teachers preparing and presenting workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor progress, at each parent meeting and workshop, sign-ins will be collected from each class. By February 2019, the number of parent workshops on Balanced Literacy, Reading stations and other curriculum areas will increase by 3%, measured by workshop agendas, parent attendance and reflections.All workshops will be presented in English and Spanish to meet the needs of parents in our school community. Our school community has increased the number of Parent Workshops by having teacher teams present workshops on Tuesdays to parents. Partnerships with connected to our problem of practice (oral language development) also helped to increase the number of workshops offered to parents. By June 2019 we will exceed our goal of increasing the number of parent workshops by 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To monitor progress, at each parent meeting and workshop, sign-ins will be collected from each class. As a mid-point benchmark, we will look at parent attendance levels in February 2019, and expect to see that the parent attendance at school-wide events show an increase of 5% as evidenced by parent sign in sheets. At this mid-point benchmark, we will reach out to parents who have not attended any events during the first half of the year, and find out ways that would allow them to come, such as making arrangements to repeat workshops during times parents who have not attended will be available. By making these adjustments, we will expect to see our goal by June 2019. We will reach out in person during parent teacher conferences to make sure parents have been receiving the notices in their home languages inviting them to attend all events at the school, working towards seeing an increase in parents reporting being invited to the school on the School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Provided daily in one 50-minute period Provided Monday-Wednesday for 50-minute periods From 8:10-9:00 AM Monday-Friday every week from 3:00-5:45 PM Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35-4:35PM Mondays-Wednesdays 8:10-9:00 Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are selected based on their current Reading level after being assessed in the beginning of the school year using the Teacher’s College Benchmark Assessment. Students that are far below the benchmark level are chosen to participate in small group instruction, or one-to-one tutoring based on the running record assessment. Students are also assessed using the Teacher’s College Sight Word Assessment to determine words they can read fluently. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) DataDriven Differentiated ELAAcademic Intervention Services K - 2 teachers provide data-driven class based differentiated Reading and Writing instruction for at risk students. All teachers provide small group literacy instruction for at-risk students utilizing literacy centers, word sorts and guided reading instruction. AISSupport Services RTI Research-based Fountas& Pinnellstrategies are utilized. Research-based guided reading VirtualY Program TheVirtual Y services at risk students by offering a combination of whole group, small group and individual English Language Arts and Math, homework support and enrichment project options. FORENL students: English Language Learners participate in all Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures. Instructional strategies used; ● Repeated readings, shared reading ● Guided reading ● Multisensory word study ● Interactive reading through technology Teachers provide individual or small group assessment-based ELA instruction for at risk students. Individualized Tutoring Sessions The Virtual Y program provides a combination of whole group, small group and individual 2018-19 CEP 33  instruction and academic support. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction. Academic Intervention Services listed: AfterschoolENL Fourteachers provide afterschoolENLinstruction for at risk students. Teachers utilize the following ENLStrategies. Visual cues, realia, dramatization and gestures, and expressive intonation. SmallGroup Modifications with ESLStrategies TheIEPCoordinator, certified in Bilingual Education, utilizes small group learning, Balanced Literacy modifications and ENLStrategies to service English Language Learners with IEPs. FORSTUDENTS WITH IEPs: Studentswith IEPsparticipate in all Academic Intervention Services listed: Studentswith IEPsparticipate in modified ELAinstruction utilizing the following instruction programs and methodologies. Balanced Literacy Instruction, LiteracyCenters, Reading Reform, Words Their Way, and progress monitoring. Teachers utilize additional individual teaching and re-teaching to meet the needs of all learners. Individualized AISand Educational Assistants English Language Learners participate in additional individualized and small group AISclass 2018-19 CEP 34 Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures to teach Go Math strategies. Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures to teach Go Math strategies. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction. Mathematics Students in need of AIS in Mathematics are determined once the lesson has been taught and students that need to be re-taught will be moved to a small group to receive instruction tailored to their need. based instruction provided by educational assistants according to student need and availability. Instruction consists o f teaching and re-teaching ELAlessons utilizing ESLstrategies. FOR ALL AT RISK STUDENTS INCLUDING ENL students AND STUDENTS WITH IEPs: Daily Data Driven Differentiated Math Instruction K-2 teachers provide one 45-minute period of data-driven differentiated Math instruction for at risk students. Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures to teach Math Strategies. Teachers provide individual or small group assessment-based Go Math instruction per week for at risk students using a collaborative push-in teaching model. AIS Support Services All teachers provide 25-30 minutes of class based small group Math instruction Instructional programs include Go Math and Math Centers. FOR ENL Students: A certified ENL teacher provides mandated ENL 2018-19 CEP 35  Science Based on Science Assessments and checklists. Based on Non-Fiction Science Units and Tests. instruction for English Language Learners that includes Go Math support utilizing ENL strategies. IEPs: Individualized AIS instruction for Students with IEPs Special Education teachers and educational assistants provide daily class based individual and small group re-teaching of Go Math concepts with modifications. Data Driven Differentiated ELA/ Science Academic Intervention Services K-2 teachers provide data-driven class based differentiated Reading and Writing instruction for at-risk students. All teachers provide small group literacy instruction for at-risk students utilizing literacy centers and guided reading instruction. Virtual Y Program The Virtual Y services at risk students by offering a combination of whole group, small group and individual English Language Arts, homework support and scientific enrichment project options. FOR ENL Students: Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures. Instructional strategies used; ● Repeated readings, shared reading ● Guided reading Monday-Friday as needed Provided daily in one 45-minute period Monday-Friday every week from 3:00-5:45PM Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 3:05-5:05PM ● Interactive reading through technology Mondays – Wednesdays 8:10-9:00 Repeated reading of non-fiction text. Monday – Friday need-based Shared reading of non-fiction text. Science Technology Project The Virtual Y program provides a combination of whole group, small group and individual 2018-19 CEP 36  instruction and academic support. Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction ENL students participate in all Academic Intervention Services listed: Afterschool ENL Four teachers provide afterschool ENL instruction for at risk students. Teachers utilize the following ENL strategies: Visual cues, realia, dramatization and gestures, and expressive intonation. Small Group Modifications with ENL Strategies The IEP Coordinator, certified in Bilingual Education, utilizes small group learning, Balanced Literacy modifications and ENL strategies to service English Language Learners with IEPs. FOR STUDENTS WITH IEPs: Students with IEPs participate in all Academic Intervention Services listed: Students with IEPs participate in modified Science instruction utilizing the following instructional programs and methodologies: Balanced Literacy Instruction and non-fiction reading strategies. Teachers utilize additional individual teaching and re-teaching to meet the needs of all learners. 2018-19 CEP 37  Social Studies Based on Social Studies assessments and checklists Based on Performance on Non-Fiction Social Studies Units and Tests. Individualized AIS with Educational Assistants ENL students participate in additional individualized and small group AIS class based instruction provided by educational assistants according to student need and availability. Instruction consists of teaching and re-teaching Science lessons utilizing ENL strategies. Data Driven Differentiated ELA/ Social Studies Academic Intervention Services K-2 teachers provide data-driven class based differentiated Reading and Writing instruction for at risk students. All teachers provide small group literacy instruction for at-risk students utilizing literacy centers and guided reading instruction. Virtual Y Program The Virtual Y services at risk students by offering a combination of whole group, small group and individual English Language Arts, homework support and Social Studies enrichment project options. FOR ENL students: ENL students participate in all Academic Intervention Services listed: Teachers utilize individual and small group instruction and flexible class structures. Instructional strategies used; ● Repeated readings, shared reading ● Guided reading Monday-Friday need based Provided daily in one 50-minute period Monday-Friday every week from 3:00-5:45PM Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35-4:35PM ● Interactive reading through technology Mondays-Wednesdays and 8:10-9:00 Repeated reading of non-fiction text. as needed Monday-Friday as needed Shared reading of non-fiction text. Social Studies Technology Project The Virtual Y program provides a combination of whole group, small group and individual instruction and academic support. 2018-19 CEP 38  Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction Differentiated small group and one-to-one instruction Afterschool ENL Four teachers provide afterschool ENL instruction for at risk students. Teachers utilize the following ENL strategies: Visual cues, realia, dramatization and gestures, and expressive intonation. Small Group Modifications with ENL Strategies The IEP Coordinator, certified in Bilingual Education, utilizes small group learning, Balanced Literacy modifications and ESL strategies to service English Language Learners with IEPs. FOR STUDENTS WITH IEPs: Students with IEPs participate in all Academic Intervention Services listed: Students with IEPs participate in modified Science instruction utilizing the following instructional programs and methodologies: Balanced Literacy Instruction and non-fiction reading strategies. Teachers utilize additional individual teaching and re-teaching to meet the needs of all learners. Individualized AIS with Educational Assistants English Language Learners participate in 2018-19 CEP 39  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Based on: ● Teacher Checklists ● Observations ● Behavior Modification Plans ● Parental Input additional individualized and small group AIS class based instruction provided by educational assistants according to student need and availability. Instruction consists of teaching and re-teaching Social Studies lessons utilizing ESL strategies. The School Guidance Counselor provides 30-minute small group and individual counseling according to student need. This academic and Social Emotional Support program provides services for students with IEPs and or at-risk students and/or ELLs to enhance their social and academic skills. The program supports designated instructional programs for each subject area according to student need and IEP mandates. Small group and individual. Wednesdays and as per Staff Schedules as needed 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have one student who is in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We currently provide additional academic support during AIS and after school program. All staff members work closely with the student and the family to provide all social, emotional and academic support the student needs. School counselor and parent coordinator work closely with student and family to ensure all needs are addressed. Services include tutoring in phonics, foundational and Literacy skills as needed. After school Virtual Y is offered to provide after school care. The Social Worker, Guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator have periodic check-ins and collect food, clothes, toys, school supplies as necessary. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The following strategies and activities are currently use for recruitment to ensure that PS 228 teachers are highly qualified: ● Attend Job fairs to interview and attract highly qualified teachers. ● Utilize the Department of Human Resources to identify and assign potential teaching candidates who are highly qualified. ● Search the open market as a source of new teacher recruitment for Highly Qualified Teachers. ● Maintain communication with Queens College student teachers mentored at PS 228 who are certified and seeking employment. The following strategies and activities are currently used for assignments, support and retention of Highly Qualified Teachers: ● New Teachers receive mentoring from grade leaders and members of the PD Team for the first year of teaching and beyond. ● New Teacher Workshops are provided and partner-teachers work collaboratively. ● School administrators will collaborate with Network Human Relations Team to encourage all teachers to attain 175 hours of Professional Development within 5 years of receiving their professional licenses. ● Teachers will be encouraged to attend licensing workshops. ● Participate in monthly network meetings including Special Education, Inquiry and ESL. Administrators will provide 3 or more hours per month on the Danielson Framework of Teaching and ADVANCE. 2018-19 CEP 43  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The following strategies and activities are currently used for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals and staff at PS 228: ● School based professional development is offered 3 or more times per week by members of the PS 228 Professional Development Team including the Principal, the Assistant Principal, the UFT Teacher Center Coach, the ESL and Dual Language Facilitators, the IEP Coordinator, the Grade Leaders, Pre-K -2 teachers, the Parent Coordinator and the Educational Assistants. ● Collaborative study frameworks include grade leader structures, common preps, inquiry teams, ESL and Dual Language Teams and ICT teaching teams foster ongoing professional learning. ● Ongoing school based and off site PL provided by Field Support Center, District, Central, the PS 228 PD Team, the UFT Teacher Center, STEM, TESOL and other providers. ● Field Support Center, District, Central and the other PL providers offer school based and off site professional learning experiences for teachers such as inquiry, ESL, RTI and VTS. ● Professional Development Focus topics include Research based strategies connected to the Common Core State Standards, Common Core aligned tasks, Ready Gen, Go Math, ADVANCE and the Danielson Rubric for Effective Teaching. ● Teacher Teams participate in afterschool PD on Mondays between 2:30 and 3:50 for curriculum planning, inquiry and lesson study. ● Science cluster attends PD for Sustainability and Professional Development classes aligned with GrowNYC grant and the Battery Urban Farm. ● Arts Team will attend VTS (Visual Thinking Strategies) series and 92 Street Y Music Professional Development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 44  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A team of PS 228 educators attend the community preschool fair to inform parents about PS 228’s common-core aligned curricular programs. Kindergarten tours conducted during springtime allow parents and children to visit classes and become acquainted with Kindergarten learning environment. Kindergarten screening assesses students’ pre-requisite skills and ensures proper class placement. Ongoing parent workshops and early childhood celebrations help parents teach their children skills and strategies to facilitate supportive transitions through the early grades. Pre-K and K teachers participate in assessment-based vertical planning to share curriculum maps and develop common core aligned plans. IEP and ESL coordinator also meet with parents to arrange services and program placement according to IEP and ELL mandates. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A MOSL (Measures of Student Learning) Team was created according to NYCDOE guidelines. The team attended ADVANCE PD, District PD and Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) training sessions. The team reviewed 2017 assessment options for early childhood. Team members met to exchange ideas about assessment selection and to consider staff input. The MOSL team selected the following early childhood measures of student learning for K-2 classes: The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP), The NYCDOE Math Performance Task assessment and the NYCDOE performance task for Writing. The team reviewed protocols and structures for assessment administration and scoring. The PS 228 PD team offered grade specific professional development during Summer and Fall 2016. Teachers learned how to administer, score, disaggregate results of assessments and assess student strengths and next steps. Teachers work in clusters and partnerships to ensure proper administration and scoring. Professional development will continue across the year. Ongoing assessment is addressed at weekly grade meetings, PD and SD sessions and faculty conferences. Ongoing assessments also include progress monitoring, portfolios, conference notes, checklists and other class assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 45  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 165,681.00 89,939.00 16,304.00 0 1,990,101.00 x x x NA x 5A and 5C Part 2 5A and 5 C Part 2 5A and 5C Part 2 NA 5A and 5C Part 2 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 46  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 228, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 228 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 49  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 228, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 50  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 52  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 3 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 228's 2018-2019 Title III after school program will service a total of 60 newcomer ELL students in grades 1 and 2 at the transitioning and expanding levels of language proficiency. It will provide supplemental instruction to both general education and Ell students with disabilities. The program will consist of a total of three classes with the following composition: one first grade general education class, one second grade general education class, and one bridge class composed of first and second grade Ell students with disabilities. Instruction will be delivered by two bilingual certified teachers and one bilingual and special education certified teacher, in both Spanish and English. The program will take place from November 28, 2018 to May 23, 2019, for a total of 40 sessions and will meet two days per week, for two hours each day. A review of exam scores and the EDAT report based on Spring 2018 NYSESLAT, indicate that approximately 26% of Ell students having taken the exam, remained at the same proficiency level. In addition, Ell SWD's either remained at the same level or regressed by one. The EDAT report also identified speaking and writing as the two modalities of most need for NYSESLAT test takers across grades (K through 2nd). P.S. 228's 2018-2019 Title III program will focus on supporting first and second grade general education Ell students and Ell SWD's who remained at the same or regressed in language proficiency levels. Direct instruction will target the development of speaking and writing modalities in alignment with areas of need, as identified by Spring 2018 NYSESLAT scores and the EDAT report. The program will focus on the development of oral language and writing skills, and academic content area knowledge in Spanish and English, through non-fiction thematic units and non-fiction texts. Activities will include: accountable talk sessions, cooperative learning activities, researching non-fiction topics, oral presentations, and non-fiction writing. Materials to be used will be Benchmark Education's Content Connections Big Book program. Copies of Title III documentation, including: permission slips, class rosters, attendance rosters, and parent notifications, will be kept on file in school's Title III Binder, to be housed in school principal's office. Notification letters will be made available in parents' preferred languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Title III professional development will be provided for teachers working the after school program and will consist of monthly 1 hr. sessions to take place for November 2018 to May 2019, for a total of seven PD sessions. PD sessions will be delivered by Ms. Leticia Cruz, Ell Coordinator/ENL teacher. In alignment with areas of need, as identified by NYSESLAT scores and EDAT report, initial sessions will focus on oral language development strategies, academic language and content area knowledge development, writing skills development for Ell's, and oral and written language structures in English and Spanish. Subsequent PD sessions will focus on assessment of language in Ell's, specifically in the modalities of speaking and writing. Copies of PD agendas and records of attendance will be kept on file in school's Title III binder, to be housed in school principal's office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental engagement will consist of two 1.5 hr. workshop sessions to be delivered by Ms. Cruz/Ell Coordinator/ENL teacher. Parent workshop topics will include strategies to develop oral language in children and assessment expectations for Ell students. Parent notifications, materials, and translation services will be made available in parents' preferred languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name E.C. Magnet School of the Arts Borough Queens School Number 228 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Olga. I. Guzman Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leticia Cruz/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Belkis Parache/Science Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Assistant Principal Diana Rodriguez Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Maria Mora Parent Coordinator Reyna Verduga Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 7 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 15 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 254 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 153 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 60.24%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 4 4 8 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 4 8 0 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 8 0 0 12 0 0 20 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 228 implements all components of the TCRWP literacy assessment to assess English language literacy skills in our transitional bilingual education and dual language classrooms in grades K through 2nd . Spanish literacy skills of students in transitional bilingual education and dual language classrooms in grades K through 2nd are measured through “EL Sistema de Evaluacion de Lectura” by Fountas and Pinnell. Assessment data for the end of the 2017 school year indicates that 37% of ENLs assessed are performing at benchmark levels in literacy, 21% are approaching grade level benchmarks, 31% are below grade level benchmarks, and 10% are exceeding. Data obtained is utilized to inform instruction and grouping within classrooms as well as for AIS programming, RTI models, development of school wide inquiry projects, and assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  Teachers participate in district sponsored professional development sessions with a focus on formative assessments for ENL students. Assessment schedules are discussed and developed during grade leader meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of ENL programs is measured by student performance in Periodic Assessments and the meeting of AYP goals in both native and second languages, in advancement across language proficiency levels as per annual NYSESLAT scores, and ENL outcomes as indicated in our Annual Progress Report. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative assessment data has been gathered it is utilized to guide instructional groups and differentiate instruction to meet the needs of our ENL students. AIS/RTI teachers are incorporated into daily instructional schedule. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 228Q’s RTI/Data team meets at least four times per year to review and ensure that core instruction meets the needs of ENL students in grades K through 2nd. Curriculum, instruction, and interventions are revised, as needed. RTI academic support occurs within classrooms and in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. ENL instruction in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 level, with students moving into Tiers 2 and 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Fall 2017 NYSITELL scores of newly identified ENLs indicate that most newly identified ENL students scored at the expanding level (38.9%). As per the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores indicate that most ENL students assessed remained at the same proficiency level or advanced one level, with 22.5% remaining at the same level and 10.18% advancing one level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assessment findings are shared. Grade leader meetings and professional development. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 228's Freestanding ENL program consists of a total of 3 monolingual classes, with each grade housing one Freestanding ENL classroom. ENL students in Freestanding ENL classrooms are serviced by Ms. Leticia Cruz, dually certified teacher, through standalone and integrated ENL instruction. Standalone ENL instruction is designed to develop English language skills to support students in their learning in core content subjects. Integrated ENL instruction develops students' English language skills through content area instruction. K, 1 st and 2 nd grade ENL students in the Freestanding ENL program are heterogeneoulsy grouped. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 228's Spanish/English Transitional Bilingual program is composed of a total of 4 TBE classrooms in grades K through 2 nd . There are 2 TBE classrooms in grade K, with one being a self-contained 12:1 TBE class, 1 TBE class in grade one, and 1 bridge 12:1 TBE class combining students from grades 1 and 2. Instruction in TBE classrooms is 2018-19 CEP 61  delivered by bilingual certified teachers. ENL students within TBE classrooms are heterogeneously grouped. Classroom instruction incorporates differentiation and students are grouped by English and native language proficiency during various instructional activities. Entering and Emerging level ENLs continue to receive 2 units of ENL instruction, Transitioning and Expanding level students will receive 1 unit, and Commanding level students receive .5 unit of ENL instruction for an additional two years. c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 228's Spanish/English Dual Language program is composed of four Dual Language classes: 2 DL classes in K, with one being a DL/ICT classroom, 2 in first grade, with one being a DL/ICT classroom and 2 in second grade, with one being a DL/ICT classroom. All DL classrooms follow a self-contained model with instruction delivered by teachers with bilingual and bilingual special education certifications (DL ICT class). P.S. 228Q ‘s DL program follows an alternating language of the day schedule in which instruction is delivered entirely in one language for one full day, followed by full immersion in the other language on the following day. All content areas are taught in both English and the target language (Spanish). Entering and Emerging level ENLs continue to receive 2 units of ENL instruction, Transitioning and Expanding level students will receive 1 unit, and Commanding level students receive .5 unit of ENL instruction for an additional two years. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Freestanding ENL: Standalone and Integrated ENL instruction in our Freestanding ENL program is delivered through a pull-out model by Ms. Cruz, who is a dually certified ENL teacher (ESOL and Common Branches) and CR-Part 154 mandates. Ms. Cruz and general education teachers schedule planning sessions to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. Freestanding ENL instruction can also include home language support. Students at the Entering level receive a minimum of 2 daily units of study four days per week/360 per week of ENL instruction delivered by Ms. Cruz, with one unit being delivered as standalone ENL and the other as integrated ENL through the content area of social studies. Students at the Emerging level also receive 2 units/360 minutes of ENL in the form of 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL, Expanding Level students also receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL, and Commanding level/former ENLs receive a minimum of 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Transitional Bilingual: TBE Kindergarten classrooms adhere to the 60/40 percent model, with 60% of instruction in the native language and 40% in English. First grade TBE classrooms provide 60% of instruction in English and 40% in the native language. ENL students in TBE programs receive ENL instruction in alignment with proficiency levels and CR-Part 154 mandates. Entering level ENLs receive: 1 unit of stand-alone and 1 unit of integrated ENL per week for a total of 360 mins. of ENL per week, Emerging level students receive: .5 units of standalone ENL, 1 unit of integrated ENL, and an additional .5 unit of stand-alone ENL for a total of 360 mins. of ENL instruction per week. Transitioning level students receive .5 unit of integrated ENL and .5 unit of standalone ENL for a total of 180 mins. per week, Expanding level ENLs receive 1 unit of integrated ENL for a total of 180 mins. of ENL instruction per week, and Commanding level students receive .5 unit/90 mins. of integrated ENL instruction per week. Content area instruction in TBE classrooms is conducted in both English and Spanish. In K TBE classrooms content areas, such as Math and Social Studies are taught in Spanish. First and second grade classes deliver a minimum of one content area in students' home language. Entering and Emerging level ENL students receive a minimum of 75% of their instruction in their native language and 25% in English. Transitioning students receive at least 50% of instruction in Spanish and English and Expanding level ENLs receive a minimum of 60% of instruction in English and 40% in Spanish. All ENLs in TBE classrooms receive mandated units of ENL instruction in accordance to their English proficiency levels. Dual Language: ENL instruction for ENL students in DL classrooms is delivered according to proficiency levels and CR Part 154 mandates. Entering and Emerging level ENLs receive 2 units/360 minutes of ENL through 180 mins. of standalone ENL and 180 mins. of integrated ENL. Emerging level ENLs also receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction through 90 mins. of standalone ENL and 180 mins. of integrated ENL. Transitioning level students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction through 90 mins. of integrated ENL and 90 mins. of standalone ENL. Advanced level students receive a total of 180 mins. of integrated 2018-19 CEP 62  ENL. Commanding level students receive 90 mins. of integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction in all three program models incorporates strategies to assist in the development across all four language modalities, in alignment with Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL: Content area instruction is delivered in English. Native language support may be provided to clarify concepts. Strategies of sheltered English instruction are integrated such as: modification in the delivery of the language, use of context clues, extensive modeling, activation of prior knowledge, use of graphic organizers, cooperative group work sessions, shared reading, and writing experiences. Instructional programs and materials include: ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathways curriculum, TCRWP/Writing Workshop, GoMath Mathematics program in Spanish and English, NYCDOE Scope and Sequences for Social Studies and Science, Reading Reform, and the Visual Thinking Strategies program. Transitional Bilingual Education: Content area instruction in TBE classroom is delivered in Spanish and English and incorporates components of Developmental Bilingual or Maintenance Model programs which promote the development native language skills while students works towards acquiring English. Entering and Emerging level students receive instruction in Spanish for a minimum of two content area subjects. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding level students receive instruction in Spanish for one content area. Grade K TBE classrooms deliver Social Studies and Math subjects in Spanish. Instructional strategies include: clear language objectives, cooperative learning activities, explicit vocabulary instruction, use of realia, modeling, and use of graphic organizers and manipulatives. Instructional programs and materials include: ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathways curriculum, TCRWP/Writing Workshop, GoMath Mathematics curriculum in Spanish and English, NYCDOE Scope and Sequences for Social Studies and Science, Reading Reform, Estrellita, Cancionero, and the Visual Thinking Strategies program. Dual Language: All content area instruction in DL classes is delivered in Spanish and English. Instructional strategies include: cooperative learning activities, activation of prior knowledge, incorporation of students' cultural backgrounds in lesson/thematic plannning, shared reading, writing, and speaking activities, accountable talk sessions, use of realia and manipulatives, authentic assessments and rubrics. Curriculum and instructional materials include: ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathways curriculum, TCRWP/Writing Workshop, GoMath program in Spanish and English, NYCDOE Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequences, Reading Reform, Estrellita, Cancionero, Trofeos Spanish literacy program, VTS program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL students are assessed in their native language through periodic assessments such as: the Fountas and Pinnell Sistema de Evaluacion de Lectura. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE Students: Although P.S. 228's current ENL composition does not include SIFE students, to date, Instructional differentiation for SIFE students would include: participation in AIS/RTI Tiered intervention program and Title III after school programs, differentiated grouping, assignments, and assessments, leveled libraries at SIFE student's identified reading level, and guidance counselor support. Additional support would also include the sponsoring of workshops for families of SIFE students, with the goal of introducing them to standards-based instruction, strategies to support SIFE students in the home, and available community-based resources. 2018-19 CEP 63  b. Newcomer: Participation in one period of AIS/RTI Tiered Intervention program three times per week and in Title III after school program, leveled libraries in native language and English, access to web-based programs to support language development, differentiated grouping, parent workshops on CCLS and on methods to support ENL students in the home. c. Developing: ENLs serviced for 4 to 6 years: Participation in P.S. 228’s AIS/RTI Tiered intervention program and Title III after school programs, creation of alternate assessments and portfolios to track Developing ENLs progress. d. Long Term: As a Pre K to 2 nd grade school, P.S. 228's ENL population does not include long-term ENL’s. Instructional differentiation for students in this subgroup would include: participation in AIS/RTI and Title III programs, professional development opportunities for educators of long-term ENLs, native language support to facilitate acquisition of academic language in L1 and L2, and ENL through content-area instruction, and referral to additional intervention programs. e. Former ENLs continue to take part in P.S. 228’s Title III after school AIS/RTI programs. Former ENLs are also eligible for ENL testing accommodations for up to two years after having achieved language proficiency. Accommodations include: time extension, separate location, and the availability of bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers and providers working with ENL-SWDs provide instruction according to IEP mandates. ENLs-SWDs participate in extended day AIS programming. Instructional strategies of ENLs-SWD include: native and second language development and explicit phonics instruction through programs such as Estrellita, Bumpy books, and web-based programs such as Starfall.com and Razkids. Classroom instruction includes differentiated and flexible grouping and cooperative learning activities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENLs-SWDs are provided with related and differentiated instruction according to IEP mandates. Related service providers and classroom teachers collaborate to develop individual student schedules for related services such as: speech, physical, and occupational therapy. Delivery of services takes place within the school day and through a combination of both Push-In and Pull-Out sessions. Lessons are scaffolded to meet both the language needs and related service mandates of students. The criteria used to place ENL-SWDs in ICT classes is as follows: bilingual cognitive and academic assessments, clinical student interviews, classroom observations, review of social history, classroom teacher reports, and the inclusion of general and special education teachers as members of the IEP team during meetings. In order to ensure flexible programming and maximize time spent with non-disabled peers, parental consent is obtained prior to conducting trial placement of students in least restrictive environments to determine student academic functioning in these settings. We also adhere to the Standard Continuum of Services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ENLs not meeting grade level benchmarks in ELA consist of small group instruction integrating workshop model components, guided reading, multisensory instruction, and specific RTI strategies to supplement whole class literacy instruction and progress across the four language modalities, as included in literacy curriculums such as ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathways. Targeted intervention for ENLs below grade level benchmarks in math consists of small group/differentiated instruction delivered by certified teachers and educational assistants that incorporate Tier 1 and Tier 2 strategies, as per Go Math curriculum. Interventions are delivered in both Spanish and English. RTI Data Team will meet to monitor student progress and conduct necessary modifications to existing intervention programs, classroom instruction, and staff professional development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Improvements for the upcoming school year will include acquiring and integrating more technology in the instruction of ENLs and incorporating thematic learning stations across content areas. Literacy stations are aligned with curriculum programs across content areas and are differentiated to meet student needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 64  It is expected that all of our current programs for ENLs continue to be implemented during the upcoming school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ENLs are provided with the opportunity to fully participate and are represented in all school-based enrichment programs such as: morning AIS/RTI sessions, Title III after school program, Glee Club and music enrichment clubs, 92 nd Street Y program, VTS program, Studio in a School, and Boy Scouts Club. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ENLs include: native language literacy programs such as Estrellita, Cancionero, and Trofeos. Materials supporting English language literacy include: ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathways, TCRW Workshop, Razkids, Reading A to Z, Fundations, Bumpy Books, and the Spalding Method/Reading Reform. Math resources and materials are available through the Go Math program, in both Spanish and English. Integration of technology is delivered through the use of Smartboards and web-based programs such as: RazKids, Reading A to Z, and Brainpop. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed through feedback obtained during professional development sessions, grade leader meetings, and parent workshops. Native language support in TBE, Dual language, and Freestanding ENL classrooms includes providing parent communication in preferred languages. Classroom instruction promotes home language support through the use of various programs, websites, native language libraries, and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Mandated services are aligned with student IEP and individual annual progress goals, CCSS, and grade level benchmarks for content area subjects. Literacy and math resources, in both Spanish and English, are differentiated by grade. Native language support programs such as Estrellita are integrated in K and 1st grade and Trofeos is implemented in 2nd grade TBE and Dual Language classrooms. Required services and support correspond to age and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although P.S. 228Q is not currently sharing a building planning for collocation would include: development of schedules, allotted planning time, and equal access to resources and materials. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students and their parents are invited to take part in a welcoming orientation, which takes place at the end of the prior school year, for those students entering in the fall. The meeting is conducted by: school administrators, Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator, classroom teachers, and related service providers. Its focus is to introduce newly enrolled families to school staff members, school-wide initiatives, and policies. Parents also receive a welcome packet with school information and grade-specific educational resources. During the meeting, parents and students are provided with a tour of the school. In addition, the first week of the academic school year, parents and newly identified ENLs also participate in our Curriculum Day or Night orientation, which is designed to have parents and students visit classrooms and meet with their classroom teachers to discuss class expectations, curriculum, and initiatives for the school year. New ENLs enrolling throughout the school year and their families are invited to participate in ENL parent workshops, Parent Coordinator sponsored activities, such as family luncheons, outings, and workshops. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As an early childhood school, servicing grades K through 2nd, P.S. 228Q does not currently offer language elective courses for ENLs. Parents who are interested are allowed the opportunity to opt-in our dual language program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 65  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In all Dual Language classrooms from K through 2nd, Spanish and English is utilized 50% of the time for both EP and ENL students. All Dual Language classrooms follow a self-contained model allowing all EP and ENL students to be integrated throughout the entire school day. Content areas are taught in both English and Spanish. Emergent literacy instruction takes place simultaneously. All Dual Language programs follow an alternating day schedule in which students receive a full day of instruction in English followed by a full day of instruction in Spanish. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for all ENL personnel, including classroom teachers will consist of weekly professional development sessions to take place Mondays for a minimum of 90 minutes each session. Topics to be presented will include overview of school Language Allocation Policy, ENL methodologies and alignment with CCSS, curriculum differentiation for ENLs based on levels of language proficiency, ENL assessment, and data analysis. All educators of ENLs will also attend PD during Chancellor Conference Days and throughout the school year and take part in a minimum of five, 1 ½ hour of after school PD with a focus on curriculum mapping for ENLs aligned with CCSS. Additional monthly PD will consist of grade specific staff development to be delivered by administrators, Literacy Coach, and ENL Coordinator. Teachers will also take part in class intervisitations within grades, across grades, and with partnering schools. Professional development for all teachers of ENLs will include attending district sponsored workshosp, ReadyGen and Go Math workshop series, Estrellita program workshop series, as well as DOE sponsored PD with a focus on ENL methodologies and CCSS alignment, assessments, and guidelines. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Educators of ENLs transitioning to upper elementary grades are notified of neighboring or district-wide programs and schools as well as open houses via: emails and invitations to DOE and school-sponsored meetings and open houses. School staff members will participate in a minimum of 15% of hours of professional development on language acquisition and best co-teaching practices for integrating language and content instruction for ENLs. Bilingual and the ENL teacher will participate in a minimum of 50% of PD hours with a focus on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction and on best practices for strategies in co-teaching and the integration of language and content area instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 66  Parents of ENL students are offered the opportunity to attend workshops and meetings that provide information on program guidelines, students' performance, the language development process, assessment expectations, and other topics of interest. These workshops and meetings are in addition to orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Translation services will be provided, as needed, via school staff members or through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Families take part in outings, food drives, penny harvest, multicultural appreciation celebrations and annual dance festival, as well as welcoming, end-of-year, and parent appreciation luncheons. Parent coordinator provides a minimum of two parent workshops, per month, on topics ranging from curriculum initiatives to community resources, and health awareness. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Olga Guzman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Olga I. Guzman Title Principal Diana Rodriguez Assistant Principal Reyna Verduga Parent Coordinator Leticia Cruz Maria Mora ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Belkis Parache Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q228 School Name: P.S. 228Q Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 228's written and oral language interpretation needs are assessed by examining and analyzing responses to Home Language Identification Surveys, ATS RAPL and UPPG reports, and Parent Responses to preferred oral and written languages in Blue Emergency Contact cards. Informal data regarding language preferences is also obtained from direct feedback from parents during ongoing communication, parent meetings and workshops. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 70  Language Spanish, Urdu, Bengali, and Chinese, Mandarin, Nepali, and Punjabi. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly calendars of events, monthly curriculum newsletter, monthly principal's newsletter, PTA newsletter, PT conference announcements, after school activities, assessment dates. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school PT conferences held four times per year, curriculum night to take place in September, Tuesday parent conferences and workshops, student celebrations, at-risk and potential holdover student plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 71  meetings, stepping up ceremonies, student behavior management meetings, gifted and talented meetings, awards meetings.J 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 228 will fulfill section VII of Chancellor's Regulations regarding parental notifications by providing written notifications regarding parental rights to translations and interpretation services and resources for obtaining such services. Postings will be printed and displayed in English, Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, and Bengali, indicating parent rights and resources for language and translation. Rights and Resources for Language Interpretation/Translation" posters will be displayed at lobby entrance, by security desk, and in main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey, needs assessment survey, PTA executive board meetings, PTA meetings, and SLT meetings. 2018-19 CEP 72 
