2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q229 School Name: P.S. 229 EMANUEL KAPLAN Principal: SETH BERGER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Emanuel Kaplan School 24Q229 School Number (DBN): 24Q229 PK-5 67-25 51 st Rd. Woodside, NY 11377 781-446-2120 Phone Number: 718-672-3117 Fax: Gina Mascia GMascia@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mr. Seth Berger Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lorertta Tumbarello Dora Rivera CorinaFalcone Dora Rivera N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Madeline Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Avenue, Corona NY 11368 Superintendent’s Office Address: MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3770 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Seth Berger Loretta Tumbarello Dora Rivera Dora Rivera Christian Rodriguez CorinaFalcone NechamaBlisko *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Francine Molloy Donna Martinez Dora Rivera EugenaCogan Cheryl Apicella Joy Prendergast Parent Vacancy Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 229 will be a safe environment where a love of learning will be nurtured in every child. Students will be encouraged to be academic risk-takers; inquisitive, independent and critical thinkers; and confident, responsible citizens. Our school will be strengthened by a strong partnership with the parent community and our rich cultural diversity. Our teachers will have the opportunity for professional growth and will work collaboratively with all 2018-19 CEP 9  stakeholders. We will prepare students to be technologically literate and appreciate the arts. We will facilitate the various learning styles of all students to assure they reach the highest standards possible. “P.S. 229 is a school where seeds are planted and children bloom.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Many years ago, P.S. 229, Emanuel Kaplan School was one of the first schools in Queens to have an elevator installed. With the result of having a long history of being an inclusive school, housing many special needs students and having many specialized staff members to service these students. Today, we continue to offer specialized programs such as the Academic, Career and Essential Skills Program (ACES) to qualifying students. These students enter the community with their teacher and paraprofessionals visiting local markets to gain life experiences. In addition to our students with special needs, we offer a district Gifted and Talented program and have a stable and active parent community. We have a long standing relationship with Maspeth Town Hall and offer our school community extended days Monday through Friday, certain holidays, vacations and summer camp. Our focus is on a rigorous curriculum and we emphasize the arts. Over seventeen years ago, we have partnered with Midori and Friends for a enriched musical program that offers string , band and guitar instruction to our 3rd - 5th grade students. Additionally, we partnered with Dancing Classrooms over ten years ago, offering ballroom dancing to our grade four students. In June 2017, our 4th grade dancing team won the gold medal and overall won the Rainbow of Colors Grand Finale in first place. Within our school grounds we maintain a school garden in which many herbs and vegetables are grown and harvested. The students, along with their teachers maintain the garden and is incorporated into our science curriculum aligned to the Science Scope and Sequence. Students in grades 3-5 have the opportunity to become part of our student government. Fifth graders enter into a Town Hall type setting when candidates debate one another on relevant topics facilitated by one of our teachers. These students focus on school improvement and philanthropic events. Some of our annual events are listed below:  Halloween Show - annual production presented by school staff where Broadway like productions are created.  UNICEF each year we collect thousands of dollars, this year we collected over $7,000.00  City Harvest 3,000 pounds of food collected  STEM Night - evening where math games are played, science projects are celebrated and events to further the earth's environment are presented Student of the Month awards given out during monthly PTA meetings   Principal's Awards given out bi-annually for highest academic achievement  Ballroom Culminating Event & Ballroom Team competitions 2018-19 CEP 10 Fancy Bake Sale to support Ballroom   Midori Music Concert at Lincoln Center- highlighting the musicians in our school  Recycling Police - student organization to further awareness of recycling and helping the environment  Games for the Physically Challenged - an annual event held at Hofstra University where our students compete in athletics for physically challenged students. Staff volunteer their weekend to support students and bake sales are held throughout the year to fund this activity.  Crazy Hat Day to honor Dr.Seus and foster creativity  Annual Toy Drive to benefit Metro Shelter and needy students in our school - staff adopts a needy child and purchases a specific gift for each child International Night – the most highly attended event at our school  Annual Talent Show   Movie Night  Mother / Son sports event sponsored by our PTA  School Spirit Week and Field Days - where whole school is involved in competitive events sponsored by student leadership team  Annual Mathathon & Hopathon collecting thousands for St. Jude's Children's Hospital Our School Survey results continue to show that we rate above the city averages in Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership and Trust. We continue to be one of the top performing schools in District 24 with just about 60% of our students scoring at proficient levels in both ELA and Math. We embrace our school’s diversity and consider that to be one of our strengths. Additionally, we pride ourselves on strong family ties and a positive connection to the community. We support students and their families from the Metro Shelter and make visits to Queens Nursing Home in an effort to support all community members. We hold may fund raisers and make charitable donations to multiple organizations and charities. In addition to our humanitarian accomplishments we place great importance on instruction and rigor. Our School Quality Report and School Survey reflect this in all categories. The School Quality Report has a rating of well-developed and our school’s learning survey of instructional core, systems for improvement and school culture are all above citywide satisfaction ratings. Of course we are not without our challenges. Maintaining a rigorous academic program with a large, diverse population is an ongoing test for any school. After careful review and analysis of all recent data, we can see that we showed improvement in the number of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities who showed improvement in both ELA and Math. We will continue to support all aspects of reading skills in fluency and comprehension and build on our problem solving skills in math. This coming school year, we will continue the emphasis on small group instruction in order to hone in on the specific needs of all our students, while challenging our most abled students with independent work that will create student 2018-19 CEP 11  autonomy. We will ensure that all teachers are providing the supports necessary for further student growth. Professional development will provided for all teachers to increase their capacity in literacy and math instruction and in order to keep them up to date with the latest research education and how children learn best. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We house an ACES (Academic, Career and Essential Skills) program. The class has 12 students from grades 3, 4 and 5. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our 2017 results for the Framework for Great Schools show our ratings to be above city averages in Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership and Trust. Last year we had a focused goal to improve Strong Family-Community Ties. Our school’s strengths are its diversity and strong, stable community never forgetting to help those less fortunate than we are. Our support of the Metro Shelter children and their families, the visits our students make for the Queens Nursing Home and the large amount of money we donate through fund raisers for various charities speaks for itself. In addition to our humanitarian accomplishments we place great importance on rigor and our School Quality Report and School Survey reflect this. The School Quality Report has a rating of well-developed and our school’s learning survey of instructional core, systems for improvement and school culture are all above citywide satisfaction ratings. Of course we are not without our challenges and maintaining a rigorous academic program with a large, diverse population is an ongoing test for any school. After careful review and analysis of all recent data, we can see that we showed improvement in the number of students with disabilities and our English Language Learners who showed improvement one year over the next in both ELA and Math. We will continue to focus on the areas of problem solving, critical thinking, inference, synthesizing and using relevant text evidence to support conclusions drawn from the text. By continuing this focus, we seek to improve the progress made by students in the area of solving real world problems and producing strong evidence – based writing. A key focus of this school year is a shift to professional learning communities and increase our parent participation and outreach for our students with special needs and English Language Learners. Our goal is to exemplify for staff, students and parents that, “Learning never ends.” 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q229 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1469 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 89 88 64 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 116 108 64 64 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 63.5% % Reduced Lunch 8.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 40.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 21.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.66 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 57.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 94 92 64 95.4% 7.8% 20.8% 1.5% 36.0% 0.7% 6 21% 7.4 58.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To improve the instructional core across classrooms in all subject areas as well as teacher practice our school team reviewed our item analysis in math and ELA, curriculum maps, pacing calendars, scope and sequence, student performance and data for the 2018-2019 school year. We pinpointed our two main subgroups of SWD and ENL's and identified the need to focus on higher order thinking skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 5% of all students will increase their levels of cognitive and higher order thinking skills. It will be measured by an increase in reading levels and improved performance on performance tasks 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive training in ELA to improve small group instruction - both enrichment and remedial. All Teachers 10/18-5/19 3 times per month Teachers will receive training in ELA to improve small group instruction - both enrichment and remedial. All Teachers 11/18 -5/19 1 time per month Coaches, Principal, AP's, Literacy Consultant Coaches, Principal, AP's, Universal Literacy Coach Teachers will receive training in Number Talks, in the content area of math, to improve critical thinking. All teachers 10/18-11/18 Coaches, Principal, AP's Critical thinking will be taught through a variety of strategies that include guided reading, strategy groups, math problem solving strategy groups and enrichment groups. All Teachers and Students 9/18-6/19 All Teachers, Students, Principal, AP's Professional learning will focus around differentiated instruction, guided reading groups, math problem solving groups and enrichment groups. All Teachers 11/18 - 2/19 1 time per week Grade Band Community, Principal, AP's, Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will communicate with parents at least three times a year of targeted students to inform them of child's reading levels and how they can support the child at home. Send home reading logs and suggested reading list. Give parents the ongoing Invite during Tuesday parent engagement time and tell parents of their June goal for the child. Progress will be monitored by Assistant Principals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development on guided reading, strategy lessons and small group work. 2018-19 CEP 15  Teacher team meetings Analyzing student work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The midpoint benchmark, that will indicate progress, will be the iReady assessment and Teacher's College Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year, Middle of Year and End of Year Assessments for iReady, Teacher's College Assessments and MOSL. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? To improve the instructional core across classrooms in all subject areas as well as teacher practice our school team reviewed our item analysis in math and ELA, curriculum maps, pacing calendars, scope and sequence, student performance, and June instructional report and identified the need to target Tier 1 students and show growth in reading levels.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 85% of classroom teachers will provide small group instruction to targeted Tier I students in order to support their individual academic needs resulting in more than one year’s growth for 8% of the targeted students as indicated by reading level assessments (F&P). 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning committee will collaborate to implement professional development on guided reading, small group instruction and strategy lessons. Professional 11/18-2/19 Learning Committee 1 time per week Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Classroom lessons and homework will be differentiated based on student abilities and choices will be offered. All teachers 9/18-6/19 Running records will be administered in November, March and June to monitor reading levels and progress for all students. All teachers 11/18, 3/19, 6/19 3 times per year Guided reading groups and strategy groups will be based on assessments and data. All teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will communicate with parents at least three times a year of targeted students to inform them of child's reading levels and how they can support the child at home. Send home reading logs and suggested reading list. Give parents the ongoing Invite during Tuesday parent engagement time and tell parents of their June goal for the child. Progress will be monitored by Assistant Principals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  Professional Development on guided reading, strategy lessons and small group work. Teacher team meetings Analyzing student work AIS Push in teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year, Middle of Year and End of Year Assessments for iReady, Teacher's College Assessments and MOSL. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running Records, iReady Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An intense review was conducted by our cabinet of summative conference notes, teacher surveys, school goals, grade goals, and teacher goals. As a result of the findings, our cabinet identified the need for continued professional learning to improve best practices in guided reading. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in professional learning opportunities to improve best practices in small group instruction including guided reading, student strategy groups and, student enrichment groups. Impact will result in increased student engagement and an increase in Reading Levels using Teacher's College Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive training in ELA to improve small group instruction - both enrichment and remedial. All Staff 11/18 - 2/19 1 time per week Professional Learning Committee /All Staff Literacy Consultant During professional learning, key staff will be trained on improving best practices in small group . All Staff 11/18 - 2/19 Professional Learning Analyzing and studying student work in all subject areas. All Staff 9/18-6/19 Prof. Learning Committee /All Staff Committee /All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the September Parent Engagement night, information regarding teacher teams will be distributed to all parents. Teachers will discuss, with the parents, how as a grade they work together in order to improve on curriculum and teacher practices. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Time for the Professional Development Committee to meet and plan. Time to Create Professional Learning Log with workshop descriptions and schedules for Mondays Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year and Middle of Year Assessments for Teacher's College Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year and Middle of Year Assessments for Teacher's College Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To deepen the work using the Danielson Framework for Teaching to improve teacher effectiveness our cabinet reviewed feedback from the previous school year on Advance and from teachers. We identified that we need to give additional feedback and support in Tier 1 interventions and using data to drive instructional groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 40% (from October-June) of classrooms engaging in targeted small group activities (i.e. guided reading, strategy /skills small groups, math stations, etc.) as indicated by information gathered during learning rounds, administrative observations, Teacher's College Assessments and Advance data. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will participate in professional learning dedicated to guided reading and small group work . Professional learning that focuses on Guided Reading in the classroom. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers and professional learning committee 10/18 - 5/18 3 times a month Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff, Literacy Consultant All staff 11/18 - 2/19 Principal, Assistant Teacher communities will focus on identifying targeted students on the grade and in their individual classes. All Staff 9/18-6/19 Teachers and related staff will participate in AIS/PPT meetings to discuss Tier 1 students. All Staff 9/18-6/19 1 time per month Teachers will track the progress of targeted students over a 6 week period. A All teachers 9/18-6/19 Teacher teams will analyze and organize data on targeted students. All teachers 9/18-6/19 Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Professional learning committee will do a parent workshop on guided reading and strategies to help your child with reading at home. Two workshops will be presented. One in the fall and one in the spring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will attend Professional Learning Sessions focusing on guided reading and small group instruction during Monday Professional learning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year and Middle of Year Assessments for Teacher's College Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by comparing the Beginning of the Year and Middle of Year Assessments for Teacher's College Assessments as well as look at the targeted students portfolio Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To better meet the needs of our school community we met as a school team and identified the need to improve relationships with all families as we analyzed our parent communication logs, environmental survey, and attendance at school events, workshops and parent teacher conferences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10% increase in parent attendance at workshops and school sponsored events. Workshops and events are geared towards strategies that parents can implement to improve academic success. Progress will be measured by improvements in student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent engagement nights and Tuesday afternoons will be advertised more with fliers in as many languages as feasible and notes in homework planners. All 9/18-6/19 Teachers Teachers will be encouraged to invite parents into the classrooms, incorporate class websites, newsletters, student newsletters, online curriculum sites and homework help into their curriculum. All materials will be translated and phone calls will be made to specific parents on a case by case need. Principal award assemblies will continue as well as honoring student of the month recipients at our monthly PTA meetings. ENL and special education receive these awards and will be notified appropriately. GE and ENL Teachers will be required to host two curriculum based workshops on Tuesday afternoons for parents. All 9/18-6/19 Teachers All Teachers 9/18-6/19 All 9/18-6/19 Teachers SE Teachers will be required to host two curriculum based workshops on Tuesday afternoons for parents. The focus of these workshops will be understanding IEP goals with translations if needed. All 9/18-6/19 Teachers Parent coordinator will host workshops for parents on finanaces, nutrition and parenting skills. All 9/18-6/19 Teachers Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff Principals, Assistant Principals, Instructional School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Maspeth Federal Bank Maspeth Town Hall Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for staff to supervise the night time events. Meetings with appropriate staff to coordinate notices, letters, passes and common planning time to execute and plan the events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point benchmark: February 2019 Review Parent Communication Logs and Evaluation Forms from workshops and attendance sheets from events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent feedback and attendance at workshops. PTA sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA/ Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Saturday Academy Small Group After School PID Status Maspeth Town Hall) Small Group Before School Student Progress ELL Morning Prog Small Group After School Parental Inquiry ENL After School Small Group, School Day Teacher Recommendation Funded Reading One to One School Day Headsprout Leap Frog/Leap Pads Whole Group School Day Fundations One to One SchoolDay Wilson Small Group School Day Learning Leaders Small Group School Day Lexia My On AIS Individual School Day Individual School Day Small Group School Day After School Mathematics NYS MAth Saturday Academy Small Group Scores Maspeth Town Hall Small Group After School PID Status ENL Morning Prog Small Group Before School Student Progress ENL After School Small Group After School 2018-19 CEP 29  Parental Inquiry Funded Reading Small Group School Day Teacher Headsprout Individual School Day Recommendation Go Math Reteach Small Group School Day Learning Leaders Small Group/One to One School Day AIS Reading For Information Reading For Information AIS and STH Counseling Small Group Small Group School Day The School Day Small Group The School Day Small Group/One to One The School Day Science PIDStatus NYSELAScores NYSMath Scores Social Studies PIDStatus NYSELASCores NYSMAthScores PIDStatus NYSELAScores NYSMathScores At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 76 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, Winter clothing, Class trips, Holiday gifts, Before/After school programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Title 1 school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  Title 1 School 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title 1 School 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have established relationships with local universities in whose student teachers do internships and hours at PS 229. Many of these teachers are then interviewed and hired when positions become available. Additionally, resumes are submitted by other principals as well as from teachers within the building. These resumes go through an initial screening based on the specific license area in need. In order to ensure that teachers are highly qualified teachers, we only accept those resumes that fit the specific license area in need and those candidates that possess the proper certification and qualifying credentials. Once we have a pool of applicants, all candidates go through a rigorous selection and interview process. Potential hires are brought in for an initial interview with a hiring committee comprised of administrators and teachers. After the initial interview process, those candidates who advance are invited to the school to conduct a demonstration lesson. They are asked to prepare for a literacy based lesson and are matched with the potential grade(s) they will be servicing (should they be hired). Finally, the hiring committee makes recommendations, based on the interview and demonstration lesson, to the principal for final hiring decisions. All potential staff members are asked to provide at least three (3) references that we may contact. Upon verifying the candidate’s prior work experience and professional conduct, we officially offer the candidate the position. All new staff members are assigned a mentor and buddy teacher. The mentor meets with the teacher and satisfies the state mandate for mentoring hours. The buddy teacher is assigned to help acclimate the new teacher to the building. We ensure that all new teachers receive adequate support in order to retain them. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Throughout the 2018-2019 School Year administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and staff will participate in differentiated professional learning opportunities based on their needs and preferences. P.S. 229s PLT, in conjunction with an instructional lead from the Queens North Field Support Center, Nicole Bienhorn, has designed a year long PD plan that is aligned with our instructional focus. At the conclusion of professional learning sessions, staff will be asked to provide feedback regarding the session so improvements to the process can be made. Teachers who attend professional development outside the school will be asked to turnkey that information during designated scheduled Mondays. On these Mondays teachers will have the choice to attend these turnkey sessions. Next Generation 2018-19 CEP 33  Standards, Quality Review, The Framework for Great Schools, Danielson Framework for Teachers, and our instructional focus were all considered in the design of our professional learning plan. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. SWP schools 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). SWP Schools Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). - Pre-K teachers attend curriculum planning sessions with the kindergarten teachers in order to familiarize themselves with the expectations set for kindergarten students. - Pre-K students’ academic levels and social and physical needs are documented for the teachers of the following year. After placement, Pre- K teachers meet with Kindergarten teachers to discuss needs of individual students. - in June, an orientation meeting is held for parents of Pre- K students. School staff, including Kindergarten teachers, parent coordinator, and administrators familiarize parents with expectations for the following school year. - Classroom visits are arranged for parents of students transitioning to Kindergarten in the fall. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During the 2018-2019 school year teachers and school staff will participate in three planned professional learning cycles with the first cycle beginning on October 15, 2018 running to December 17, 2018. Cycle II will run from January 28, 2019 - March 18, 2019 and cycle III from April 1, 2019 - May 13, 2019. Teams will meet on Mondays to research, design and discuss effective strategies in the implementation of guided reading and the management needs fo guided reading. Other Mondays will be designated for staff to turnkey professional learning that they have attended outside of the school as well to facilitate an awareness of The Next Generation Standards. Two other Mondays have been secured for the Department of Mental Health to deliver mandated sessions to the staff. Teacher teams will work 2018-19 CEP 34 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 589,937 123,701 16,590 N/A 8,303,878 X x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A - 5D Section 5B Sections 5A- 5D Sections 5A - 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local collaboratively in reviewing student work, chapter tests, pre and post assessments, and all reading assessments to validate the strategies used throughout the guided reading lessons. Teachers will also evaluate centers/stations that were designed to meet the needs of students working independently as the teacher works with small groups. Teachers will continue to analyze the work and make necessary changes after careful evaluation of all student assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 35  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 229 Emanuel Kaplan, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 229 Emanuel Kaplan will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 229 Emanuel Kaplan, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: P.S. 229’s Title III program provides approximately 30 English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in an After-School Program. After looking at the ELL Data Analysis tool, we chose students who showed the least growth and targeted them as the students to include in our program. After analyzing the EDAT, we noticed the proximity of the ELLs in attaining the next level and found exactly what we need to assist them in attaining that next level of proficiency. The three teachers that will be working in our program are ENL certified. Mrs. Jennifer Amare has a TESOL and common branch license. Ms. Betty Quizhpi has a TESOL and Early childhood license and Ms. Zahra Khan has a common branch and TESOL. The After School Program will service ELLs in grades 1-5. There is one 1st grade class for beginners (10 students), one 2nd and 3rd grade class (10 students), and a 4th grade and 5th grade class for intermediates and advanced (10 students) that meet two times a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:00 for 48 sessions from October 2018 through May 2019. The focus of the instruction will be literacy and math using ENL strategies and the group size will be maintained at 10 or fewer students per teacher. Some of the strategies that we will be working on are, self monitoring by checking our comprehension when reading, use of available resources which include dictionaries and word walls, summarizing main idea in spoken or written language, questioning by asking teacher/others for clarification, scaffolding using graphic organizers and visual aids, and cooperation by working with peers to solve problems. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 229's Title III Professional Development Program will focus on providing teachers with the opportunity to look at the school and make suggestions for the betterment of the ELL supplementary program. The rationale for having our workshops are so that the teachers are aware of the newest apporaches to assiting ELLs learning an alternate way of responding to questions for state exams as well as seeing the struggles our ELLs continue to have in all four modalities. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops and trainers will be paid at the per session rate. Each 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development workshop will be two hours long. Agendas and attendance sheets will be kept on file. These professional development sessions will be facilitated by school administrators and ENL teachers. Teachers working in the supplementary programs with ELLs will receive three two-hour professional development sessions after school from 2:30 P.M. – 4:30 P.M. Topics that will be addressed during these professional development sessions are as follows: 1. Two-hour professional development session devoted to scaffolding writing for ELLs. Mrs. Amare – ENL coordinator/teacher. (November 2018) 2. Two-hour professional development sessions devoted to using EDAT tool. How can this data be useful for planning? Mrs. Amare ENL coordinator/teacher (January 2019) 3. Two-hour professional development sessions will be devoted to Advanced Literacy for ELLs. Mrs. Amare -- ENL coordinator/teacher (March 2019) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 229’s Title III program will provide ELL parents and guardians with an opportunity to attend 27 hours of parent English classes. A certified teacher will teach these classes. Instructional materials such as adult ENL workbooks will be utilized during class. Our parent coordinator will help create a welcoming school environment and host parent workshops and meetings on issues of interest to parents. For example, a Homework Help Workshop -- Dial-A-Teacher, Learning Leaders Workshop -- Learning Leaders Liaison, Parenting Workshop -- Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor. The ENL teachers also hold workshops for the parents. Invitations will be sent in different languages inviting parents to our Holiday ELL Workshop for parents to get together. They sing English songs guided by an ENL teacher and discuss the progress their child has made thus far. The workshops are from an hour to two hours and refreshments are served. Agendas and attendance sheets will be kept. Translators are present at all of our workshops to ensure that the parents understand everything being said. In addition, the coordinator will provide information about our ELL services in the school and work closely with the ELL coordinator in order to reach immigrant parents in their native languages through written or oral translations. 2018-19 CEP 46  Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff N/A Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After School ELL Grades 1-5 (Teachers)*(Sessions)*(hours)*(rate)= (3) (48) (1.5) ($60.65) $13,100.40 Total cost of $13,100.40 ------------------------------------------------ Parent English Classes (Teachers)*(Sessions)*(hours)*(rate)= (1) (27) (1) ($60.65) $1,637.55 Participation teachers -- Professional Development (Teachers)*(Sessions)*(hours)*(rate)= (4) (3) (2) ($60.65) $1,455.60 Facilitators -- Professional Development (Teachers)*(Sessions)*(hours)*(rate)= (1) (3) (2) ($60.65) $363.90 Total cost: $3,517.70 ------------------------------------------------ Total overall cost: $16,430.93 N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 16,557.45 Other TOTAL N/A 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Emanuel Kaplan Borough Queens School Number 229 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Seth Berger Coach Samantha Gonzalez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Amare Teacher/Subject Area Christian Rodriguez/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Stefanie Graziano/5th Grade Te Related-Service Provider Maegan Walter-Garvey Superintendent Madeline Chan Assistant Principal Gina Mascia Coach Catherine Sirianni School Counselor Lisa Ryan Parent Huijun Guo Parent Coordinator Mary Messina Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 49  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1469 Total number of ELLs 124 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.44% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 229 we have formal and informal assessment. Formal assessments include standardized testing, performance based assessment, running records and unit or teacher-made tests. Informal assessment incorporates observation, small group activities, guided reading, and evidence of student work. We will have inquiry groups focusing on the weaker students in ELA and math. Each student has a folder and the assessment can be found in that folder. The folder is passed along from grade to grade so that the classroom teacher or ENL teacher can see the growth of the student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 50  ENL teacher teams as well as the faculty will be assigned to an inquiry team on Monday afternoons to determine which strategies can be implemented to improve student learning in ELA and Math. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At P.S. 229, the success of our program is measured by the growth shown within each of the modalities on the NYSESLAT as well as progression of proficiency level. Most of our ELL students who enter our school in kindergarten without a learning disability graduate at the proficient level. After each unit of study, the students will be given a performance based assessment. This assessment will show whether the student has progressed in the skill targeted by the unit in ReadyGen which is what our school uses. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative data is analyzed by ENL and Tier II teachers to evaluate and prescribe additional interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For each English Language Learner who scores below the passing level of performances on the Annual English Language Proficiency Assessment, the school provides additional support services after taking into consideration the number of years of instruction in English as a New Language program, English and home language literacy, NYSESLAT scores, English as a new language teacher recommendation, classroom teacher recommendation and parent/guardian request. Students will be grouped in areas of need (vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, etc.). Item analysis is interpreted and weaknesses are targeted. Students that fall in the lowest 1/3 of the population will have intense reading instruction that includes SGI, guided reading and Wilson Reading system for SWDs. The strategies used for ELLs include modeling, audiovisuals, semantic mapping, graphic organizers, and explicit vocabulary development in the content areas. There is the use of Leap Pads and comprehension workbooks from Continental Press. English Language Learners also participate in the Title III funded after-school program, early bird and Saturday Academy. Learning Leaders work with individual students in the areas of reading and writing. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After analyzing the results of the NYSESLAT, we found that : Of all of last year’s kindergarten students, 17% scored on the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. Of all last year’s first grade, 39% of the students scored on the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. 24% of them remained on the same level. Of all last year’s second grade, 33% of students score on the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. Of all last year’s third grade, 33% of students scored on the commanding level, while 3% of the students remained on the same level for 2 or more years. Of all last year’s fourth grade, 26% progressed 2 levels. The students weaknesses across grade levels is writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly/monthly team meetings to analyze student work to determine growth and success of interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 51  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 229 is a multicultural school located in Woodside, Queens. Our total student population is 1,469. 8.4% constitute our English Language Learners. The Former ELLs who need to be serviced for an additional two years of passing the NYSESLAT are not included in the 8.4%. There are Former ELLs who need to be serviced that make up 28% of the student population The models used in P.S. 229 are the standalone and integrated models. We currently have one self-contained ELL class on grade 2. ELLs are placed in regular instructional classes grouped by proficiency level with a certified common branch teacher and an ENL certified teacher that provides the standalone or integrated time required by the proficiency level of the students in the class. The ENL teachers organize their integrated schedule during reading, writing or math. We participate in the ReadyGen literacy program developed by Pearson as well as Core Knowledge to address the ELA Common Core standards. The program includes 90 minutes of literacy daily from grades K-5. ReadyGEN engages students with complex text and its academic language through the use of units of study designed around text sets at each grade level. Students are asked to extract and employ evidence from text, and use text sets to understand evidence within and across texts to support writing. It builds knowledge through theme-based units of study that balance literacy and informational text. The ENL teacher services students in either two, four or eight times per week for 45 minutes depending on the student's proficiency level. The ENL teacher may provide standalone four times per week to fulfill the NYS CR Part 154 mandated number of units of ENL. Entering and emerging levels are grouped together. Transitioning and expanding are grouped together. The commanding students are grouped together to receive the 90 minutes a week of services in a content area. The ENL teachers meet with the classroom teacher to discuss the needs of their ELLs. They devise goals for their students and use various strategies to try and meet their target goals. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are grouped according to the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT and their reading level when assessed. Our school uses the Teacher's College Reading Assessment. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes a week of standalone ENL and 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL instruction. Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL instruction with an additional 180 minutes per week for ELA instruction. The ENL instruction is differentiated as per the proficiency levels in order to meet the needs of all our ELL students. All of our ELL students receive the same rigorous curriculum as monolingual students. The newcomers are taught necessary expressions/vocabulary to help them feel acclimated into the environment of their new school. Home Language support is given when necessary. The ENL teachers meet with the classroom teacher to plan together. They use the same teaching points from ReadyGEN or Core Knowledge. The Ready Gen Program promotes small group work in both the verbal and written form. The model utilizes such strategies as accountable talk, turn and talk and writing celebrations. The use of computer technology to assist the ELL students is available and will be increased each year to meet the needs of our language learners. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 52  The ENL classrooms provide print-rich environments, which reflect instruction and students’ current work as aligned with the ENL Learning Standards. Every classroom is equipped with a leveled library containing culturally diverse books. Students who are not in a Self-Contained ENL classroom receive integrated services by certified and highly-qualified ENL teachers who, after careful planning with the classroom teacher, incorporate ENL strategies to help students acquire English through the content area. In our free-standing English as a New Language model, the content area is delivered in English. Dictionaries, glossaries, student pairing (same native language), charts, highlighting text books and learning leaders are used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development. Our goals are to provide academic subject area instruction in English using ENL strategies and methodology, to incorporate ENL strategic instruction in every lesson and within the content areas and to assist students in achieving the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade by the third year of ENL services considering that there is no interruption in their academic year and that their cognitive ability does not interfere with their ability to learn. To engage ELLs above the beginner level in developing grade-level content, the teachers use clear, direct, simple English and a wide range of scaffolding strategies to communicate meaningful input in the content area to students. Teachers use learning activities that connect new content to students’ prior knowledge. The ENL teacher outlines the lesson content,teaches content vocabulary and summarizes main points, pauses after a main point and checks for understanding by asking students to paraphrase what was said. When questions are being asked, the ENL teacher waits for student to process. Total Physical Response activities are used for entering students accompanied by realia, visuals and model gestures. Yes/no questions, pictures are labeled and writing is modeled and drawing is encouraged. These are all in an effort to promote the learning of academic language in the content areas. For emergent level students for speaking, you ask cloze questions, you tap into prior knowledge, you mirror speech back to the student. For reading, you choral read, you teach vocabulary and repeat reading for fluency development. In writing you encourage inventive spelling and use language experience approach. For transition level students, you teach basic story elements, sequence events, teach questions, and ask students to paraphrase directions. You model appropriate speech. In reading, you facilitate literacy responses, use reference material and guide discussion of reading. In writing, you teach process writing and graphic organizer for pre-writing. For expanding you call on the students to formulate questions. You preview key terminology with content area in instruction, you guide content reading, you read to learn information and you provide instruction of grammar rules. The overall goal for ELLs is to educate them using a high-standard based program with the common core leaning standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs who speak Spanish and fail the NYSITELL, receive the Spanish LAB. ELLs who are in the country two years or less receive all content area state exams in their native language or through a translator to exceed state standards. Home language support is delivered through dictionaries/ipads. English Language Learners new to the country transition by working with ENL teachers and pairing up with other students from their country that speak their language. ENL teachers work with students to give them basic functional language to negotiate through our school 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P.S. 229 Differentiates instruction for all subgroups. When a students enters our school, as analysis of the student's past enrollment in school is conducted. a. For SIFE students, programming and instruction is adjusted for them. He or she is given AIS such as the Fundations Program if needed. SIFE students often need additional help with their basic language acquisition. When possible a SIFE student receives support in their home language to help them understand the text. They are closely watched to make sure that they are included in classroom work especially small group and hands-on activities. b. For students with less than three years of ENL services, the academic emphasis is placed on acquiring vocabulary and shared experiences. These ELL classrooms have evidence of functional prints (labeling of classroom), large diagrams with important terms, theme word walls, use of pictures next to directions and evidence of group work. Appropriate teaching strategies are given to them such as TPR, partners, academic language webs and repetition to increase their English skills. These students are also mandated for the Title III extended day. In ELL Extended Day, “On Our Way to English” is used 2018-19 CEP 53  which addresses the four modalities of language. Classes are limited to 10 students so the teacher can focus on the needs of the individual students. The ELLs receive literacy and math support from a certified ENL teacher. If a student is a newcomer, he or she may take content-standardized tests in his/her native language if available. c. Our plan for ELLs receiving service four to five years depends on the student’s needs. When they are reading, the students will be grouped according to their instructional level. When they are writing, they will be grouped in areas of need (vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, etc.). Item analysis is interpreted and weaknesses are targeted. All instruction will be differentiated based upon areas of need. Students will work with Leap Pads as well. Constant reinforcement of basic English vocabulary will be present in every mini lesson. Peer tutoring is also used by having our fifth-grade student's help with individual students. Learning Leaders, who are volunteers work with individual students as well. For developing ELLs who show weaknesses in reading and writing, an Early Bird program is designed for them to work on various skills in reading and in writing. d. (N/A - ELLs receiving services 7 or more years) e. For former ELLs, at least two years following, the school year in which the students are exited from ELL status, they will receive one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified and testing accommodations. A reading specialist also addresses newly commanding ELLs four to five times a week for forty-five minutes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL SWDs use grade-level text. For self contained classrooms, we have Pearson’s Reading Street that has an ELL component. It offers ELL SWDs the same Common Core experiences as the regular education students to ensure that the state mandated tests on grade level do not come as a total surprise to the students. The instruction is differentiated by varying background and vocabulary development, varying modes of reading the material and varying the amount of the text read at a time. Furthermore, this program provides scaffolding and support. It has English Language Development Readers with visuals to provide all ELL access to the same content. Content in the readers is scaffolded according to language proficiency level. It provides guidance on instructional strategies designed to prepare English Language Learners for standardized tests. The Wilson Reading System is also being used by teachers with SWDs and we have SGI twice a week for fifty-five minutes. SMART boards are used to reinforce whatever was just taught and the Safari Montage program allows teachers to stream video into the classroom on virtually any topic. Strategies such as graphic organizers, computer based programs, word webs, sentence deconstruction, modeling, partner work and Go Math scaffolds to help promote the understanding of grade appropriate work. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Depending on the severity of a student's disability, there are two instructional plans for ELLs identified as having special needs at P.S. 229Q. One model is the ICT Program. This program integrates general education students with special education students in a reduced class registrar. In these classes there is a special education teacher, a general education teacher and a paraprofessional. The ENL teacher pushes in whenever possible and works within the classroom or pulls out. The other model is the self-contained special education class. In the program the ratio is 12:1:1 (twelve students, one special education teacher and one paraprofessional). Here, the ENL teacher pushes in. In both programs, the curriculum is scaffolded and adapted to address the individual needs of special education students. ENL teachers try to provide integrated instruction so that there is the least amount of distraction and disruption in the daily schedules of our ELL's and SWD's learners. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After a school wide data analysis we were able to identify the strengths and weaknesses of our students. This is done through inquiry work, analysis of conference notes, teacher observations and critical analysis of running records. Based on student's NYSESLAT scores, ELA exams, and teacher’s classroom data, students will be grouped in areas of need (vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, etc.). Item analysis is interpreted and weaknesses are targeted. Students that fall in the lowest 1/3 of the population will have intense reading instruction that includes SGI, guided reading and Wilson Reading system for SWDs. The strategies used for ELLs include modeling, audiovisuals, semantic mapping, graphic organizers, and explicit vocabulary 2018-19 CEP 54  development in the content areas. There is the use of Leap Pads and comprehension workbooks from Continental Press during Extended Day. The ELL students also participate in Title III funded after-school program, Early Bird and summer school. Peer tutoring is also used by having our sixth grade students help with individual students and Learning Leaders work with individual students as well. For students who are struggling in math, we have the after school program (Maspeth Town Hall) who service the students in small groups. We have Go Math which is used to help our ELLs by scaffolding its approach to learning Math. The continued focus is the learning of academic vocabulary in all content areas. We have learning leaders, Dreambox and Saturday Academy that serves a small group. For students struggling in science and social studies, we have small group "reading for Information" during the school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 229 will continue participating in a Federal Funded Project. This puppetry program through Arts Connection, will target Kindergarten, first and second grade where the students participate in group activities, including creative play, storytelling, creative writing, pantomime and improvisation. We have been involved with this program for many years and have noticed that their oral and social expressions have improved. It has helped their self confidence as well. We have MyOn which is an online library. The students are assessed and a personalized library with "just right" stories are created for them. Another program we have is Dreambox in which the student work on math skills and are assessed periodically. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At present, we do not plan to discontinue and programs/services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 229 is a barrier-free school that prides itself on its collaborative school climate, welcoming all special needs, diverse populations (ELLs), gifted and general education students. The ELLs are grouped within the general education if the student requires it. We have one self-contained ENL class in Grade 2. The ELLs participate within the same rigorous academic standards, cluster programs, special arts (Dancing Classroom by American Ballroom theater company, Recorder Programs, and Midori and Friends), school government, and various school events. They also participate in an after-school program under Title III. This program enriches their reading and writing ability. We have an early bird program that prepares students for the state exams. Information about the programs available is provided in the students’ home language which encourages the ELLs to participate. Some of our annual events are listed below: • Halloween Show — annual production presented by school staff where Broadway like productions are created • UNICEF each year we collect thousands of dollars • 3,000 pounds of food collected for City Harvest • Annual blood drive collecting from 39 to 52 pints of blood held the last 6 years. • STEAM night – evening event where parents and child can enjoy learning and playing math games. Science projects are celebrated and events to further the earth’s environment are presented. • Student of the month awards given out during our monthly PTA meetings • Principal’s Awards given out bi-annually for highest academic achievement • Ballroom Culminating Event & Ballroom Team competitions • Fancy Bake Sale to support Ballroom • Midori Music Concert at Lincoln Center – highlighting the musicians in our school. • Recycling police – student organization to further awareness of recycling and helping the environment • Games for the Physically Challenged – an annual event held at Hofstra University where our students compete in athletics for physically challenged students. Staff volunteer their weekend to support students are bake sales are held throughout the year to fund this activity. • Crazy Hat Day to honor Dr. Seuss and foster creativity • Annual Toy Drive to benefit Metro Shelter and need students in our school – staff adopts a needy child and purchases specific first for each child • International Night – the most highly attended event at our school • Annual Father/Daughter dance sponsored by our PTA • School Spirit Week – where while school in involved in competitive events sponsored by students leadership team • Annual Marathon & Hopathon collecting thousands for St. Jude’s Children’s Hospital. 2018-19 CEP 55  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are various computer programs ELLs have access to while in school and at home MyOn in English or native language. A newcomer has the chance to use Rosetta Stone in English to help develop vocabulary. A website students use is Starfall. Using Starfall helps in areas of phonics, letter recognition and reading fluency. Students in Kindergarten, Grade One, Two and Three learn computer skills once a week, while those in Fourth and Fifth grade have computer class twice a week. Students are encouraged to use computers in their classroom to do research and type reports which is part of their Writing Workshop. Students are encouraged to participate in answering questions in all content areas using the Smart Board. This not only provides them with learning new technology but gives them the opportunity to express themselves despite their level of proficiency. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher have different materials to use with the children. Scaffolded instruction is provided to our ELLs to support instruction in Ready Gen and Go Math. Materials that are used are leveled libraries containing both fiction and non-fiction books so children can read at the appropriate level, visual aids, graphic organizers, picture dictionaries, listening centers, charts, writing folders, writing centers and a wide variety of manipulatives to be used in the content areas. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher use these strategies to help assess the student’s need and the products that they produce. An ELL child is paired with English speaking students and when possible someone who speaks their native language to make sure that he/she understands what is expected of them in that class. With the use of a Smart Board, the teacher makes content-area subjects more realistic and engaging. For ELLs SWD, paraprofessionals are assigned to specific students on a daily basis offering assisted instruction in their native language in all subject areas. ELL students who received a level 1 or 2 on Math and Science State exams receive small-group instruction that takes place in school two days a week for 55 minutes. We have dictionaries available in their native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When an ELL is placed in the classroom for the first time, the teacher tries to sit the child where his/her language is spoken by another child. Parts of the classroom are labeled. A list of expressions is given to each child in their native tongue with the translation into English to help them with simple everyday requests. It is also used to test newcomers in content areas and to assign paraprofessionals for ELLs SWDs. We have picture dictionaries and provide materials that have instructions and words in both languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, supports and resources correspond to the ELLS age and grade levels. ELLS are grouped according to grade age appropriate unless a student was held over. Students in the lower grades utilize pictures, acting, phonics, color coded activities and rhymes to learn vocabulary. In the upper grades, instructional support is embedded within the reading program, the smart board and online technology that support ELL students. Furthermore, academic and content specific vocabulary is learned and reinforced through various multimedia experiences with the goal that the ELLs will participate fully in grade-level course work. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When a newcomer enters the school, the ENL teacher informs the classroom teacher and the student is paired with a “buddy” to help them become more comfortable in their new environment. Dictionaries are provided by the ENL teacher and books may be available in their home language. When working with older students, the student is encouraged to write in his/her home language so the work is produced and the ELL teacher finds a way to have the writing translated. The student is introduced to our Parent Coordinator and to the two ENL teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 56  This year we will have a certified ENL teacher teaching Spanish to our Talented & Gifted student's as well as to our fifth graders. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers attend the same staff development sessions, as do the classroom teachers. Staff development sessions are intended to help pedagogical staff improve student achievement in English proficiency, math and other content areas in order for students to meet New York City and New York State content and performance standards. All teachers attend professional development and share a common preparation period with their grade counterparts to devise strategies to help ELLs reach the standard in English and content areas. In addition the ENL teachers will also provide the five-mandated workshops for all teachers on different aspects related to English Language Learners. Furthermore, the extended-day ELL teachers under Title III participate in three professional developments. Staff members are also made aware of all ELL professional development opportunities available through DELLSS. We plan to implement professional development for classroom teachers to instruct them in ESL strategies and methodologies. Information regarding standardized tests is also provided. We have an on-going inquiry-based model of professional development for all staff. The principal, supervisors, literacy coach, math coach and reading specialist look are the strengths and weaknesses of individual teachers and group them for professional development in the domains of Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for teaching that their indicators showed need. The professional development is carried-out during citywide mandatory dates, monthly faculty conferences, grade conferences and extended day. The following areas will been addressed in professional development: ** Sensitivity to culturally and linguistically diverse student and parents. ** Use of the EDAT tool to group students in the area of need. ** ENL methodologies for teachers serving ELLs including content-area instruction. ** Workshop on the 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT ** Strategies for preparing for the NYSESLAT 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The office of Queens North offers various Professional Learning Opportunities. These workshops are offered and the teachers are encouraged to register for them. After attending the workshops, the teachers are asked to turnkey information learned to staff. 2018-19 CEP 57  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 229, parental involvement is crucial to ensure the success of all ELLs.. Parents are made aware of the different programs designed to help the children achieve academic excellence. At the time of registration, the Home Language Identification Surveys are carefully reviewed to determine which children are potential ELLs. In September, parents of ELL students attend an orientation session where they are made aware of programs that are available such as ENL, Transitional Bilingual and Dual Language. During this orientation, parents will read a brochure and view a video in their native language about each program. Parents will then fill out the program selection form. After careful evaluation of the “Parent Survey and Program Selection form," students are placed according to the parents’ choice. Parents are encouraged to come and speak to the ENL teacher on Tuesdays during parental involvement. The ENL teachers are also open to meeting with parents early in the morning or after school if the parent is unable to come during parental involvement. During the meeting we discuss the goals of the program, language proficiency assessments and language development needs in all content area. Translators are available when necessary. In addition, the ENL teachers will meet with the parent of the ELL student to discuss the goals of the program, the child's language development progress, the child's proficient assessment results and language needs in all content areas. The attendance of the meeting is recorded. At P.S. 229, we have parent communication logs and rosters for attendance that are kept on file. The teachers are encouraged to establish relationships with the families of the students by communicating and explaining the instructional program and conferencing with the parents about individual students once a week in addition to orientations, parent-teacher conferences, open school week, and monthly PTA meetings. Letters in various languages are sent home to parents to invite them to attend additional workshops/event during the year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 229Q Parent Involvement Policy was designed upon careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The PTA and Parent Coordinator provide many opportunities for parents to get involved in the school. For example, there is a PTA meeting once a month and translators are available. Parents are asked to participate in Picture Day, Pumpkin Patch, Candy Sale, Book Sale, Craft Fairs and parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents' capacity to help their children at home. The PTA newsletter is translated into other languages. At present, the PTA has a parent website for easier parental communication. The school also offers many events that encourage parental involvement such as “STEAM Night” and “International Night”. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Seth Berger, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Emanuel Kaplan School DBN: 24Q229 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Seth Berger Title Principal Gina Mascia Assistant Principal Mary Messina Parent Coordinator Jennifer Amare ENL/Bilingual Teacher Huijun Guo Parent Christian Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Stefanie Graziano Teacher/Subject Area Catherine Sirianni Samantha Gonzalez Coach Coach Lisa Ryan School Counselor Madeline Chan Arlene Ubieta Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/3/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 60 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Emanuel Kaplan Superintendent: Madeline Chan DBN: 24Q229 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jennifer Amare ENL Coordinator no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In P.S. 229, there are languages other than English being spoken by the parents. However, most of the parents communicate in English. Our intent is to provide written translations in the languages with the greatest percentages to aid communication and promote parental involvement. Presently we have Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Hindi, Arabic, Urdu, Romanian and Polish for written translation. The information was generated from ATS and is also supported by emergency cards and the Home Language Identification surveys. The Parents’ Bill of Rights is distributed in various languages and signs are posted indicating availability of translation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 61  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Bengali Cebuano Chinese Cantonese Hindi Indonesian Korean Mandarin Nepali English Punjabi Polish Russian Spanish Tibetan Vietnamese 0 4 11 37 0 83 17 2 4 13 141 19 606 1 58 5 337 7 3 0 0.13 1.05 0.72 0 12.06 0 0.13 0.07 0.46 0 0.46 65.28 0.07 0.99 0.13 18.12 0.2 0.13 0 4 11 12 0 83 17 2 4 13 141 19 606 1 58 5 337 7 3 0.07 0.13 0.99 0.79 0.07 11.4 0.07 0.13 0.07 0.33 0.72 0.46 64.89 0.07 1.05 0.07 18.38 0.2 0.13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 62  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The Kindergarten Orientation Packet May-every year School Events Throughout the school year Reading level letters 3 times a year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The packet for our incoming kindergarten students is translated or updated yearly. Fliers/letters are made during the school year inviting parents to various events. A letter is translated for the parent to know what level their child is and what they can do to help them (suggested books on their level) N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences November and March Parental involvement Tuesday's throughout the school year Orientation for newly enrolled ELLs September IEP meetings throughout the year interpretation service(s)? Paraprofessionals are asked to come in to translate. Some teachers will use the translation and interpretation unit for languages that aren't spoken by staff. Any available staff is asked to assist in translations. When translation is needed for a language we don't have, we call the translations and interpretation unit. Translators are available to explain the different programs that New York City has for their child. When a parent is asked to come in for an IEP meeting, if needed, they will be provided with a translator. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. For the languages most common in our school, we have translators available on site in the event of a school emergency, we can make calls in the targeted languages. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the first meeting of the school year, the principal explains to the staff that what the procedures are for ensuring Limited English Speaking parents are provided with an opportunity to participate in programs important to their child's education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome posters are displayed by the front entrance of the school in different languages. The Parents' Bill of Rights is available online and copies are available in our parent coordinator's office. The Parents' Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide is on a postcard in the main office and on a bookcase by the security guard available in different languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent survey gives us feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. During our meetings with parents, we give them the option to give suggestions and to give any feedback about our program. During our PTA meetings, we have a translator available to encourage the parents to attend. 2018-19 CEP 64 
