2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: Principal: 30Q230 I.S. 230 RON ZIRIN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Intermediate School 230 30Q230 34310000230 6-8 School Number (DBN): 73-10 34 th Ave Jackson Heights Queens NY 11372 718-335-7648 718-335-7513 Phone Number: Fax: Barbara Newkirk bnewkir@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ronald Zirin Email Address: Matthew Hatzichristos NualaO'Doherty/Rachel Grubman, Co-Presidents Hilary Sedewitch Laura Newman N/A N/A Elianna Bourdier District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North room 518 LIC NY 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ronald Zirin Matthew Hatzichristos NualaO'Doherty Melissa Brady Laura Newman N/A N/A Elianna Bourdier Hilary Sedewitch Diana Neligan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ SLT Chair Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  KamrulHaque Ms. Chowdhury Ms. Khan Enrique Salazar Rachel Grubman Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Coordinator Member/PTACo-President Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission Statement Through access to, and the critical analysis of a variety of texts, students will build, apply and articulate their language and content knowledge in order to participate and contribute to the community and global society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Strengths, Accomplishments, and Challenges Leadership and faculty implement common core aligned curricula, and instructional shifts, as reflected in data-driven academic tasks across grades and content areas, promoting college and career readiness for all students to ensure rigorous instruction. Our collaborative teacher teams and effective school leadership continue to ensure common core aligned curricula and key instructional shifts with support from the Teachers College Reading/Writing Project as the teaching model for our school. An item-analysis led the school to choose the strand of close reading in English language arts to strengthen text comprehension across the content area spectrum. We have been and will continue to emphasize skills such as close reading and chunking text and summarizing it, annotating via underlining and circling key words, paraphrasing and rereading as often as necessary to understand the material. Teacher teams collaborate and highlight the instructional shift of evaluation and analysis. We are thoroughly committed to utilizing feedback looping as a means of engendering greater learning and deeper understanding. Whether it emanates from the teacher, a classmate or the student, we insist that feedback be specific, non-judgmental, and focused on the teaching point. In math, the school has chosen to focus on standards that require students to use proportional reasoning to solve real-world and math problems in grade 6. In grade 7 we chose to focus on algebraic expressions and equations and in grade 8, the use of functions to model relationships between quantities. Our school’s strategic data-based instructional decisions, accompanied by teacher adaptations of curricula, result in coherence and provide conceptual support students need to deepen their thinking and become college and career ready. Teacher teams meet daily to plan in and foster an atmosphere of trust and respect. Professional collaborations allow teachers to meet 3-5 times a week during a weekly professional period. Teams meet across grades, and in what the school calls, blended teams, to include grade and content area teachers. They utilize this time to assess student work, lesson plans, and create and evaluate common assessments. Based on students instructional outcomes from various data sources (2015-16 Quality review, Quality Guide and the school report card along with internal school observations and the PPO data from the 2016 -2017 school year) we have decided to strengthen our work around teachers utilizing various forms of assessment data to adjust their instruction within activities, lessons and units to best meets the learning needs of individuals and groups. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The ENL population accounts for 14.8% of the total number of students at IS 230. Of the 193 ELL students are allocated as follows: 66 ELL students in the 6th grade; 67 ELL students in the 7th grade; and 60 ELL students in the 8th grade. Of all of the students at IS 230, 15.7% are English Language Learners with IEPs. These students are placed either in Self-Contained or ICT settings. These students receive push-in ESL services by a licensed ESL teacher as well as Special Education services by a licensed special education teacher. This special population's demonstrated performance in reading, writing and mathematics consistently identifies the need for additional supports and interventions to close the achievement gap with the general school population. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Intended Outcome(s): We have made the most progress during the last year in Framework for Great Schools elements: Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. According to the Framework Element Scores for the 2016-2017 school year, the areas of most growth were Rigorous Instruction and Trust. The following data compares the 2016 results with the 2017 results. In Rigorous Instruction, the school scored 4.15 in 2016 and 4.31 in 2017. In Trust the school scored 3.62 in 2016 and 3.79 in 2017. For the 2017-2018 school year, the school will begin to focus on Strong Family Community Ties due to the drop in scores from the 2016 to 2017 Framework Element Score results. The school leadership will continue to bring organizations such as Teacher's College, Learning Systems Associates, Junior Achievement and Carl Anderson as well as other resources from the community into the school building. They will continue to welcome, encourage and develop partnerships with families, businesses and community-based organizations. Additionally Intermediate School 230 collaborates with outside families and businesses through the following: Career Day, 21st Century Community Learning Centers (21CCLC) grant, the Food Drive, the Jackson Heights parade, Generation Citizen etc. The things mention previously will help make connections between the families and communities of Jackson Heights. As a continuum of our civics theme, teachers and students will visit local New York City establishments to create ties and develop civic minded individuals. Our instructional focus for this year is to utilize our teacher teams in their professional learning communities, to develop and refine systematic methods of monitoring and tracking student progress that includes, student self-monitoring, increased parent communications to build strong community ties as well as our civic outreach programs. We want to ensure that all students, their families and staff are aware of student goals, and provide support to ALL students based on formative data utilizing feedback loops. By taking an active role in monitoring their own growth, we believe that students will be able to articulate their goals and take the necessary action steps needed to reach them. Our utilization of Distributed Leadership (Content team leaders, instructional coaches, teacher mentors, variety of enrichment programs, teacher-developed and facilitated professional development cycles) has provided the organizational framework allowing for increased staff collaboration resulting in increased student learning outcomes. We have partnered with several organizations (Teachers College, Learning Systems Associates and Carl Anderson) to provide all staff with research based pedagogical approaches to develop systems to monitor student progress that empower student to take an active role in their learning. For the 2018-2019 school year, IS 230 will conduct Instructional Rounds with a Problem of Practice that focuses on Rigor in the Classroom. Last year, IS 230 began their first term working with CEI in order to conduct Instructional 2018-19 CEP 11  Rounds. Upon visiting multiple classrooms and finding similar trends, rigor was the problem of practice most commonly identified in questioning, assessments, feedback to students etc. Starting in October 2018, IS 230 will initiate inter visitation for the purpose of instructional rounds through CEI. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q230 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1296 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 17 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 21 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 74.6% % Reduced Lunch 15.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 60.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 96 97 95.3% 6.7% 13.4% 0.5% 33.7% 1.2% 6 12% 7.1 51.9% 79% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the course of the 2017-2018 school year, IS 230 was involved with the Center for Educational Innovation Instructional Rounds with a focus on Rigorous Instruction. The Problem of Practice presented during the Instructional Rounds was: In what ways and to what extent are students experiencing rigor? During the 2018 Chancellor's Conference Day for Staff, the Center for Educational Innovation came in to discuss findings with the staff. The staff looked at patterns found during the 40 classroom visits and determined the next level of work for the school. The CEI trained staff in different areas of Instructional Rounds such as description, analysis, prediction and evaluation. Some of the main non evaluative patterns found through instructional rounds were related to rigor in questioning, task and assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, IS 230 will conduct 2 internal instructional rounds creating patterns related to the Problem of Practice and will show 10% growth in the number of classrooms demonstrating high level of rigor as pertaining to task, assessment and questioning using Blooms Taxonomy. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will work closely with teacher teams in order to determine a highly skilled and qualified Instructional Rounds teams.  Teams will meet and norm  Teams will create a year long blueprint for scheduling  Teams will visit classrooms using Instructional Rounds  Teams will collect evidence during Instructional Rounds  Teams will analyze evidence to present to staff ·After the team has gone through the initial round, teachers will meet in their common planning in order to further analyze the evidence collected and modify instruction. Teachers will focus on rigor in task, assessment and questioning. They will use the findings from the initial round to implement rigor in the classroom Teachers will be provided additional reading material on Instruction Rounds. Teachers will be provided professional development on instructional rounds. All student targeted subgroups in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies All student targeted subgroups in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies All student targeted subgroups in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator along with the PTA, professional development committee and guidance counselors will plan events to support parental involvement in supporting and implementing rigor. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize all resources to enhance instructional practices by: ● Programming teachers to have common planning time ● Daily common planning periods ● Weekly curriculum development meetings ● Monthly content meeting and differentiated professional developments planned and provided by teacher leaders ● Curriculum and resources ● Full day staff development days. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will analyze data in order to determine the level of rigor being used in task, assessment and questioning in order to see growth from the 2017-2018 introductory data as measured by evidence collected in the initial Instructional Rounds. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be assessed by non-evaluative evidence collected through Instructional Rounds, teacher lesson plans, tasks, assessments and teacher questioning using Blooms Taxonomy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, on the NYC Survey, the highest response area was in Social-Emotional with a 93% positive response rate. 96% of teachers responded that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles, 99% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards, 97% of teachers say that adults at their school teach critical thinking skills to students, 88% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students how to advocate for themselves, 99% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the organizational skills needed to be prepared for their next level, 85% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities, 87% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior and 91% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. The lowest response area was Personal Attention and Support with 59% of students responding positively. 58% of students stated that they feel like teachers help them catch up if they are behind, 59% of students reported teachers notice if they have trouble learning something, 71% of students say that teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work, 63% of students say that teachers explain things a different way if they don't understand something and 44% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. There is a clear discrepancy in the data between how teachers perceive their support and how students perceive the support they get from teachers. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, on the NYC Survey students responded with 91% positive feedback on social-emotional support at IS 230. The lowest response was in the area of Personal Attention and Support. Students responses were 64% positive. On the Survey, only 49% of students reported positively that their teachers support them when they are upset. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review data, the school scored a well developed in indicator 3.4 about communication to student and staff. In the 2014-2015 school year the school’s infrastructure changed. I.S. 230 now has two separate buildings servicing grades 6-8. Our sixth grade students are housed in the Annex and grades 7-8 are housed in the main building. The structural changes and physical separation changed our previous small learning community structures of academies. In order to continue providing a supportive environment to each student, school leadership created a new school environment structure. Each grade has a team comprised of assistant principal, guidance counselor, dean, teacher 2018-19 CEP 17  teams and additional support staff. This change from academically-teamed inter grade academies to address the social emotional and academic needs of all our students was completed in 2016. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, IS 230 will implement nutrition, health and wellness instruction through our small learning communities in each of the three grades as determined by a 3% increase in the lowest performing social-emotional survey data results. 2018-19 CEP 18 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, SLT, AP, Parents Teacher and Staff Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Based on our research from the Principal Partnership database we will provide students with a safe and supportive environment that will enhance their school performance. · A triad team consisting of an assistant principal, guidance counselor, and dean will support students social emotional and academic needs. The team will met weekly to plan special events for the grade, discuss and plan how to address identified students areas of concern need involve partnerships with parents and outside programs. We will continue to hold our students to high expectations and communicate our expectations to all members of the school community. We expect excellence from our students and staff. · Our school website also holds a wealth of information for parents: school calendar, helpful instructional websites, homework calendars, and information about special events at school and in the community. · The Pupil Personnel Team and the Least Restrictive Environment Committee meet on a regular basis to discuss at risk students and students that are excelling beyond their educational plans. · Our school Attendance Committee works to ensure high levels of student attendance and eradicate chronic absenteeism or 2018-19 CEP 19  tardiness. Assemblies, certificates and other incentives are provided to encourage students in their academic growth. · Common Core Learning Standards have been translated into “I Can” statements for students so that the rigorous work of achieving the CCLS and meeting grade level proficiency standards is clear. These documents are part of student’s portfolios in mathematics, science, reading and writing. The Principal, SLT, PTA, after school coordinator and staff in conjunction with student feedback will discuss, create and implement a health and wellness plan that will enhance student social emotional responses. Providing students with clear designated adults they can reach out to for social emotional well being and support Tuesday afternoons are dedicated to Parent Engagement. Parent contact is conducted in a variety of ways: emails, phone calls, parent newsletters and communication via Skedula and Pupil Path. Teachers keep logs about the contacts made for parents. Monthly PTA meetings provide an additional forum for parents to discuss the needs of our students. To continue to build a school culture based on trust, collaboration and respect, school leaders have open door policies. In addition, we model a level of professionalism in all we do with and for staff members. This respect is evident in Teacher Teams, interactions between and among teachers, as well as support staff and parents. The focus of our professional practice will always be an underlying commitment to student success. Through the use of SAPIS workers, LGBTQ trained staff, guidance counselors, social worker and school nurse, students will receive comprehensive health education that addresses topics such as tobacco, alcohol, drug abuse, nutrition, healthy eating, mental and emotional health, personal health and wellness, physical activity, safety and violence prevention. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, SLT, AP, Parents Teacher and Staff All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, SLT, AP, Parents Teacher and Staff All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, SLT, AP, Parents Teacher and Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator along with the PTA, professional development committee and guidance counselors will plan events to support parental involvement in supporting students social emotional, health and wellness needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize all resources to support student progress by providing: • Grade AP and Dean that will move up with the students grade 6-8 • Guidance Counselors and School Psychologist • Highly qualified teachers • Student governments to ensure all voices are heard • SLT/PTA and a variety of sub committees to ensure students’ needs are being addressed • Parent Coordinator • Peer Mediation Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, at least 25% will have attended professional development related to Social-Emotional Team Building in order to help teachers better understand the social-emotional and health needs of their students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year assessment based on teacher referrals, PPT meetings, and Dean and guidance reports for each grade, with particular scrutiny for our at risk students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths in the Framework element include teacher selection of Common Planning periods as their Circular 6 selection. Teacher teams meet in grade/content area teams three times a week to create curriculum pacing, units, lessons and assessments. Teachers assess student work on a regular basis to determine the effectiveness of the curriculum core, and adjust planning and teaching to more closely meet the learning needs of groups and individuals. A comparison of the 2016 and 2017 LES survey indicates an increase in overall teacher collaboration from 4.45 to 4.57. During the 2017-2018 school year, IS 230 began to implement academic language using Advanced Literacy Skills. Grade level teams chose Tier 2 words that were relevant to their content and grade appropriate. Teachers gave pre assessments to determine students knowledge of words. Throughout the unit, teachers used new vocabulary and students were assessed again to determine their growth and understanding of the new vocabulary through reading, writing and speaking. During interdisciplinary PLCs, teachers will select 5 target students who are performing below grade level ion the NYS ELA and Math Exams. The teachers will focus on how to implement academic vocabulary through Advanced LIteracy in order to show growth for these students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will submit Running Records and iXL data for the five targeted students showing growth for 3 out of 5 students. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Utilize programs including, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, District 30 school inter visitations for teachers, CEI Instructional Rounds Initiative, Monday 80 PD blocks, teacher initiated school inter visitations to increase access of teachers to work productively with teachers from other schools.  Teachers will work with colleagues in other schools to establish the instructional foci of teaching close reading along with other reading strategies, pre-planning higher order questions and implementing discussion protocols to deepen students understanding of how readers analyze and interpret complex text to support their writing  Teachers will work with colleagues in other schools to evaluate student work across all grades, select key standards that support instructional foci, assess for learning and determine performance gaps  Teachers will work with colleagues in other schools to evaluate and modify units, lessons and tasks to ensure high level of rigor and greater opportunities for students to demonstrate instructional foci  Teachers will work with colleagues in other schools to use formative assessment data to make instructional adjustments and monitor progress over time for all students  Teachers will work with colleagues in other schools to iimplement researched-based practices/interventions shown to be effective for English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities Teachers will use formative assessment data to make instructional adjustments and monitor progress over time for all students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers 2018-19 CEP 23 · Implement researched-based practices/interventions shown to be effective for English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities · Teacher teams will plan lessons that incorporate close reading strategies, questioning and discussion prompts to encourage critical thinking by students · Teachers will utilize Bloom's Taxonomy to determine the rigor of task and questions based on student’s formative data Parents will have access to teacher conferences every week based on the new NYC parental outreach plan for schools. Additionally, we have interim progress reports, newsletters, parent events and ceremonies where parents are continually informed of their child’s progress and given information on the CCLS. · Provide ongoing parent workshops as new strategies are implemented to ensure parents and students have the support they need and are included in our learning community To continue to build a school culture based on trust, collaboration and respect, school leaders have open door policies. In addition, we model a level of professionalism in all we do with, and for staff members. This respect is evident in Teacher Teams meetings, interactions between and among teachers, as well as support staff and parents. The focus of our professional practice will always be an underlying commitment to student success. All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator along with the PTA, and professional development committee will plan workshops for parents to explain the Advanced Literacy foci and how parents can help their child with vocabulary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Leadership Cabinet meetings ● Professional Development ● CCLS, rubrics, baseline and formative assessments, common planning periods 2018-19 CEP 24  ● Professional development ● Lead teachers provide professional development modeling effective close reading strategies ● Teacher facilitated student groups ● Daily common planning periods for all teachers by department, and weekly curriculum development meetings (Specific departments based upon assessed need) monthly departmental and faculty meetings, curriculum study groups, twenty-four full day staff development days from Teacher's College staff developers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, teachers will provide data on their five targeted students with 2 out of 5 students showing growth in Running Records and iXL data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Common Assessment to measure mastery of academic language Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams focus on aligning all Learning Objectives, Tasks, Assessments, Questions etc. to the Common Core Learning Standards. Over this 2018-2019 school year, teacher teams will begin Phase 1 of the Next Generation Learning Standards Roadmap and Implementation Timeline. Teacher teams will begin to work together in order to raise awareness of the Next Generation According to the 2018 NYS ELA and Math Exams, the target subgroups - ELLs and SWDs, both made growth. In ELA, ELLs and SWDs both increased proficiency by 10%. ELLs went from 1% proficient to 11% proficient in ELA. In Math, ELLs and SWDs both increased proficiency. ELLs went from 13% proficient to 19% proficient in Math. SWDs went from 14% proficient to 21% proficient in Math. Our strengths in this element is demonstrated in a comparison of the 2016 to 2017 LES which identifies an increase in Effective School Leadership from 3.69 to 4.17. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Survey, Effective School Leadership dropped from 4.17 to 3.73. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide support to staff through multiple and varied professional development opportunities on the Next Generation Learning Standards as measured by a 2% increase in instructional leadership on the LES. 2018-19 CEP 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, teachers, parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration will provide varied forms of professional  development to staff in order to help familiarize everyone with Next Generation Learning Standards Staff members will participate in ongoing professional learning communities focused around Stiggins (2011) ‘Assessment For Learning’ work to more effectively meet the needs of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups.  Provide professional development through outside vendors, Teacher’s College, Urban Advantage and NYC DOE professional development using instructional strategies such as Next Generation Standards, feedback loops, conferring, small group instruction, analyzing formative learning outcomes, inter-class visitations, professional learning communities will collaborate to implement modified instructional practices to more effectively meet the needs of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups.  Principal and AP will continue to utilize the Danielson framework to observe teachers, provide support, real-time coaching, and resources for growth in pedagogy to more effectively meet the needs of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups.  Provide students with a student friendly version of the standard broken down by skill(s) for units of study for students to determine their learning goals All students, teachers, parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers · Provide students with clear assessment criteria (check-lists and rubrics) to monitor their progress · Common grade level pre- and post-assessments are used to monitor student learning, set learning goals and adjust instructional practices e.g., using small group conferences, and/or differentiated instruction 2018-19 CEP 27 · Teachers analyze student work to monitor student learning utilizing feedback loops, conference notes, formative student work, norming practices and assessments · Teachers adjust instruction and differentiate tasks to accommodate student sub-groups and offer multiple entry points. This is done to narrow achievement gaps and increase critical thinking skills Parents have access to Pupil path online student tracking system and will also have access to teacher conferences every week based on the new NYC parental outreach plan for schools. Additionally, we have interim progress reports, newsletters, parent events and ceremonies where parents are continually informed of their child’s progress and given information on student academic progress. To continue to build a school culture based on trust, collaboration and respect school leaders have open door policies. In addition we model a level of professionalism in all we do with and for staff members. This respect is evident in Teacher Teams, interactions between and among teachers, as well as support staff and parents. The focus of our professional practice will always be an underlying commitment to student success. All students, teachers, parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers All students, teachers, parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher leaders, staff, and external staff developers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator along with the PTA, professional development committee and guidance counselors will plan events to support parental involvement in supporting students needs. Students will be taught how to hold and lead student led conferences with their parents. Identifying their areas of strength and areas in need of improvement relating to grade level expectations and standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Leadership Cabinet meetings, Professional Development ● CCLS, rubrics, baseline and formative assessments, common planning periods ● Rubicon Atlas curriculum, CCLS, rubrics, baseline and formative assessments, common planning periods ● Lead teachers provide professional development modeling effective close reading strategies ● Teacher facilitated student groups ● Daily common planning periods for all teachers by content, and weekly curriculum development meetings (Specific departments based upon assessed need) 2018-19 CEP 28  ● Teacher College Staff Developers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administration will assess that 100% of the staff has been provided professional development on Next Generation Standards Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in Sheets from - Monday Professional Development, Staff Professional Development Days, Certificate of Completion for outside PD Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Guide, IS 230 increased parent school survey response rate from 48% in 2016-2017 to 77% in 2017-2018. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, IS 230 scored a 2.70 on the section of Family-Community Ties. Our strengths in the element are demonstrated in the 2018 LES under, "Outreach to Parents." The highest rated metrics (>90%) are: Parents agree that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school, families say that the school communicates with them in a language and way that they understand. Based on the 2018 LES, the lowest reported metrics (<80%) include reported opportunities for parents to volunteer at school events and visit their child's classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school community will create opportunities for parents to participate in the school building as reflected by a 5% increase in the category of Parent Invovlement in School under the Strong-Family Community Ties on the LES survey. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The entire staff will increase its efforts to encourage face to face meetings with parents on Tuesday afternoons. Teachers will identify and focus upon inviting parents to more effectively meet the needs of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups. Additionally, we will increase the number of events that parents are invited to volunteer for, such as Math Family Night, Civics Fair, Career Day, Science Night, Book Fair, ESL Workshops and other school-wide events to more effectively meet the needs of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups. The PTA in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator will plan and implement trips and neighborhood events to include parents and the community in school event. with a focus parents of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups. Staff developers will collaborate with the SLT, Civics teachers and neighborhood outreach programs to provide family services for families in need with a focus upon families of ENLs, SWDs and other subgroups. The administration will provide professional development opportunities and coaching systems to the staff in order to bridge family ties through workshops and informational sessions hosted throughout the year at various times throughout the day. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 All staff and Parent Coordinator All parents PTA, Parent Coordinator and Instructional Coaches All parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 All staff and Parent Coordinator All parents, teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator and Instructional Coaches Administration, All staff and Parent Coordinator PTA, Parent Coordinator and Instructional Coaches Administration, All staff and Parent Coordinator Teachers will conduct outreach to parents through the use of technology such as online gradebooks, Google Classroom All parents, teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 31  Additionally teachers will be encouraged to try new apps such as Remind, ClassDojo, Edmodo. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement PTA, Parent Coordinator and Instructional Coaches If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The parent coordinator along with the PTA, professional development committee and guidance counselors will plan events to support parental involvement in supporting students needs. Students will be taught how to hold and lead student led conferences with their parents. Identifying their areas of strength and areas in need of improvement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our parent coordinator will attend Urban Advantage meetings to increase parental involvement in STEAM projects. Parents will be taught how to utilize city resources such as visiting the Queens science museum, all city zoos, and city-wide botanical gardens, the Natural Museum of History and the Brooklyn Aquarium. Instructional coaches will plan and execute school-wide events in conjunction with their content area expertise. They will redouble their efforts to include parents in the planning stages and voluntary attendance at school-wide events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review the data collected from the Parent Coordinator’s sign-in sheets, attendance records of our school-wide events, the PTA telephone logs and volunteer sign up sheets. An increase of 10% compared to the data from 2017-2018 will indicate adequate progress towards meeting the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018 LES Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students working below grade level (level 1 and level 2) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Eightperiods of ELA instruction programmed for all AIS students. After School supplemental academy Skills -based differentiated instruction to address assessed learning gaps Eightperiods of Math instruction programmed for all AIS students. After School supplemental academy Skills -based differentiated instruction to address assessed learning gaps Skills -based differentiated instruction to address assessed learning gaps Skills -based differentiated instruction to address assessed learning gaps Mathematics All students working below grade level (level 1 and level 2) Science Social Studies All students working below grade level (level 1 and level 2) All students working below grade level (level 1 and level 2) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, Saturday program Small group/tutoring Needs-based individual/small group instruction, conferring and partnerships During the school day, Saturday program Small group/tutoring Needs-based individual/small group instruction, conferring and partnerships Needs-based individual/small group instruction, conferring and partnerships Needs-based individual/small group instruction, conferring and partnerships During the school day, After school and Saturday programs During the school day 2018-19 CEP 33 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Studentsidentified at risk by teachers and staff small group, one-to-one During the school day, after school programs Guidance helps all students in the areas of academic achievement, personal/social development and career development, ensuring today’s students become productive, well – adjusted adults of tomorrow. Cyber Bullying, violence prevention, alcohol and drug education, peer mediation, learning and behavioral needs, suggest improvements to classroom management, strategies or parenting techniques, and evaluate students with disabilities to determine the most appropriate supports for learning, Substance and alcohol abuse, chronic health conditions such as obesity and severe asthma, Healthy Nutrition 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be given school supplies, trip fees, school uniforms and guidance meeting with intervention supports. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are screened and interviewed at the NYC DOE Hiring Halls. These teachers were pre-screened by the DOE. A second interview and a demonstration lesson are conducted at the school. The teachers are placed in their assignments based on their license area and experience. School staff is given ongoing professional development throughout the school year including common core instruction, depth of knowledge, Danielson Framework for Teaching, Close Reading Strategies, Teacher’s College and Common Core Alignment. In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the supports and strategies to grow professionally, we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers on current topics provided by other teachers, administrators, as well as support staff from our Queens borough office. Individual, high-quality mentoring is implemented as per teacher and NYS requirements. We believe in individualized professional development plans that are designed to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administrators to review their goals and monitor progress and development. Each teacher will develop an Individual Improvement Plan (IIP) mainly to move teachers toward highly-effective practice. The Danielson’s Framework for Teacher Effectiveness (2013) will be used as a professional course of study. Teachers self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders. All professional development is research and evidence based. Research Based Strategies (RBIs) are emphasized in our trainings. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our network specialists support teacher retention by providing on-site trainings, modeling, and teacher team development. We are committed to ensure that teachers have the resources and support needed to succeed. Additionally, we will continue to fund our UFT Teacher Center so that teachers have professional development opportunities and a space for collaboration. We encourage celebrations of success and sharing. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 37  A school professional learning plan for existing teachers to improve practice based on the NYC Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook Continually train and support in the Danielson Framework with teachers to familiarize them with criteria for exemplary teaching components Utilize an effective teacher model rubric (Danielson) to provide feedback to teachers Provide feedback to teachers in short and frequent observation cycles for continuous improvement Provide new teachers with mentors Provide common professional periods for teachers to share best practices Support new teachers in the tenure process Utilize the Borough Field Support Center supports Provide ongoing professional development towards addressing school wide goals Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 38  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers receive professional development and the MOSL committee meets to discuss and disseminate assessment choice to staff members. Content and grade teams meet to discuss and disseminate assessment choice to staff members. Content grade teams create common assessments (summative and formative) based on CCLS and content standards for each unit during their professional periods. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 531,232.00 0 17,358.00 0 7,147,371.00 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5E, 6, 7, 8 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 39  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Intermediate School 230 , in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), which is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Intermediate School 230 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Intermediate School 230, in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), which is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this 2018-19 CEP 43  Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School strategy is in the process of being integrated into the school through the 21st CCLC grant. One of the main focuses for this first year is to lay the foundation for a strong after school program that provides a blend of activities that includes academic support, enrichment, social/emotional learning, and physical activities facilitated by CBO teaching artists and teachers. These opportunities will be aligned with the school’s goal on improving student literacy, vocabulary, reading comprehension, and project-based learning. Our community school model is committed to bringing parents and families into the school community to engage in their children’s education. The school will offer an open-door policy, offering a variety of services and resources such as workshops, educational opportunities, events, celebrations, and social gatherings. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. One of the primary goals for the 21st CCLC after school program is to have 100% of participants accrue between 30-89 of program hours by the end of the school year, and about 50% of our participants accrue over 90 hours. Student enrollment hours are tracked by daily attendance which is entered into the Youth services database on a weekly basis. Increase yearly attendance rate by 1% by identifying chronically absent students who miss over 3 days of school per month to participate in after school programs. Students are identified through ATS reports. Once the Community School Director (CSD) has access to the Data sorter, we will be able to utilize more information in achieving this goal. Increase parent involvement to support the student attendance. The CSD meets with the Parent Coordinator and PTA to identify ways to engage the parents of the community, such as aligning parent workshops during PTA meetings and scheduling family events throughout the school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The Community School Goals are designed to support the student wholly and ensure a college bound future and help close the achievement gap. A well balanced student equipped with leadership qualities, a mindfulness approach, clear social emotional and conflict resolution skills will positively impact the community and global society as the student continues their academic journey. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership The Leadership Program Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Lunchtime Activities/After School/Parent Engagement/10 hours of PD Improve student attendance and community involvement through a variety of enrichment offerings Target Population The Leadership Program 6-8th Graders Parents Teachers LEAP 6-8th Graders After School Tiger Schulmann 6-8th Graders After School Improve student attendance and community involvement through a variety of enrichment offerings Improve student attendance and community involvement through a variety of enrichment offerings Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 21st CCLC funding is limited to using its resources specifically for ELT and after school programming. The Community School Director is on the lookout for outside partnerships to provide unique opportunities that will best serve the community. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 2018-19 CEP 49  2. 3. 4. lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. IS 230 and The Leadership Program partnered to hire a Community School Director that will identify and serve the needs of the students, families, and community through their involvement in SLT Meetings, Attendance Meetings, PTA Meetings, creating a Community School Team (CST) and Advisory Board that fosters a partnership with the community. 2. The CSD handed out activity interest surveys to students in order to create a personalized after school schedule for each student depending on their survey results. The after-school schedule evolves throughout the school year always taking into account in order to better serve the students. Lunchtime strategy games was implemented 5 days a week for the 6th grade students in the Annex building, and soon after we were able to implement a Lunchtime strategy game for 7th & 8th graders in the Main Building 3 days a week. 3. The CSD will meet monthly with the Parent Coordinator, Program Director of a partner CBO, and PTA President to find creative ways to get families to get involved during scheduled PTA meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, and student celebrated events. 4. Principal, CSD, Partnered CBOs meet monthly for a Partnership Meeting to discuss after school participation, school attendance, and family engagement. The Data Sorter has not been made available for use at IS 230. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP 50  - The Leadership Program has hired the CSD and several After School Teaching Artists to provide quality programming both after school and in school to support the community initiative. To improve quality of instruction and student interaction The Leadership Program is providing ongoing training, professional development and social emotional support to their employees placed in the school. The Leadership Program is also providing supplies and support mechanisms for the CSD like a laptop, organizational materials, office supplies, printer, and other support supplies as needed. The Leadership Program will also provide materials for the after-school program as needed, including, but not limited to art supplies, instruments, strategic games, and jewelry supplies. -LEAP is providing after school Photography and Chorus classes 2 times a week. Supplies provided include digital cameras and sheet music. - Tiger Schulmann is providing Martial Arts once a week. Supplies provided include boxing gloves and uniforms. - After School enrichment is being provided by The Leadership Program as well as teacher sponsored clubs such as Immigrant Rights Group, Newspaper/Journalism, Math and Nutrition, Girls Empowerment through Poetry, Boys2MENtors. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 21st CCLC funding does not allocate funds to the school or CBO partners for Health & Wellness which is a strong need for this community. Fortunately, the Community Schools initiative was able to provide Vision Screenings to all students and was able to give out about 400 free prescription glasses to students in need. This was such a success and we’ve received a lot of feedback stating we need to have more opportunities like this for students and families. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 2017 through June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The purpose for our Saturday program is to provide supplemental academic support for English language learners in grades 6, 7, and 8, who are not meeting the grade level standards in ELA. The rationale for this program is rooted in analysis of our most recent NYS ELA assessment data. Analysis of student performance reveals that the percentage of our tested ELL population reaching proficiency in ELA is 11%. The distribution is as follows: 45% of our tested ELLs scoring at a level 1, 44% at a level 2, 7% at a level 3, and 4% at a level 4. This data indicates a need for supplemental support in navigating the complex texts and rigorous language of English language arts. Also of note was the growth in proficiency of our English language learner subgroup from the 2017 to 2018 NYS ELA exam. In 2017, only 1% of our tested population reached proficiency. The distribution being: 57% at a level 1, 42% at a level 2, 1% at a level 3, and 0% at a level 4. In the 2017-2018 school year, we instituted a Saturday Academy program that targeted English language learners in the content area of English language arts through the collaboration of a TESOL-trained pedagogue and an ELA-trained pedagogue. The increase in the number of ELL students reaching proficiency with the institution of the Saturday Academy with supplemental English language acquisition support further supports the rationale for continuing and developing this program, which will present our English language learners with additional opportunities for language-based support within the content of ELA. The program will involve 1 ENL teacher collaboratively teaching with 3 ELA teachers across the three grades. One collaborative partnership will be in sixth grade, one in seventh grade, and one in eighth grade. To best support our ELL students, an ENL teacher will collaboratively teach with a ELA content area teacher in classes that are made up of current ELLs. The language of instruction will be English with infused home language support for language learners to bridge their home language and the target language. The NYS certified ENL teacher will collaboratively teach with the content area teachers using flexible groupings, allowing for student home language partnerships to enable students to translanguage directions, prompts, questions and discussions in L1 and L2. In order to support students' home languages, ELA bilingual glossaries will be provided for students to use in translating content vocabulary to their home language. Students will engage in whole class, small group, and partner work to close read rigorous texts and analyze and problem solve multi-step problems. The students receive additional support using language acquisition strategies to spiral the skills and content presented in the materials. Specific topics of instruction will include central idea, citing text-based evidence, close-reading strategies, decoding academic vocabulary. Main supplemental materials will include Released 2018 NYS ELA Questions from Engage NY, which include grade-level texts and both multiple choice and constructed response questions. These materials were selected as they prepare students for navigating the rigorous language of both texts and prompts, and as the materials are not used in daily instruction. The Saturday Academy will take place from 8:30 to 12:00 pm on select Saturdays.The dates for the Saturday Academy are: 1/26/19 with a focus on Central Idea/Theme 2/2/19 with a focus on Text-based Evidence 2/9/19 with a focus on Close-reading Strategies 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3/2/19 with a focus on Accessing Complex Texts Through Academic Vocabulary 3/9/19 with a focus on Text-based Evidence 3/16/19 with a focus on Close-reading Strategies 3/23/19 with a focus on Accessing Complex Texts Through Academic Vocabulary Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our population of English language learners ranges across proficiency levels in English, years of service, and home language literacy. Providing on-going professional development to content area teachers of ELLs will be essential to target specific language functions to maximize students learning in the content areas. Content area teachers, including Title III program teachers and other teachers of ELLs, will receive professional development on best pedagogical strategies to teach English language learners at various levels of English proficiency. Program teachers will be trained on the use of the supplemental materials, the new and/or challenging aspects of ELA content areas, and strategies to scaffold material for different levels of ELLs. Professional development will include, but is not limited to, analyzing and understanding students' current progression through the stages of language acquisition, designing language objectives to infuse language instruction into the content area, executing culturally responsive units of study, and modifying materials to better provide access to the curricula to students at a range of levels of English language proficiency. The training will be given by a certified ENL teacher and will take place during the scheduled professional development time on Mondays from 2:20 - 3:40. Our professional development coordinator will keep records of all professional development offered, along with the sign in sheets, agendas, and supplemental resources. Professional development will be at no cost to the program. Professional development will take place on the following dates: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->10/22/18 10/29/18 11/19/18 11/26/18 12/10/18 12/17/18 1/14/19 1/28/19 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Our parent coordinator will partner with NYS-certified ELA and ENL teachers to conduct parent meetings in conjunction with monthly PTA Meetings from 7:00 - 8:00 pm. These meetings are designed to share with parents the skills and strategies needed for students to reach grade-level mastery in the content areas, as well as English language proficiency. Parents will be informed of these meeting using the following methods: letters will be sent home and automated phone calls will be made to the students' homes. The topics of workshops are determined by conducting an analysis of parent needs. The parent coordinator sends an annual parent needs survey to determine the parental engagement activities for the following school year. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are invited to participate in these workshops. Parents will be notified by flyer in home languages of the families. The parent coordinator translates all engagement activities to Spanish and the PTA President translates activities to Bengali, as needed. For other home languages, assistive devices are available to parents. Our parent coordinator is responsible for maintaining records including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations. These meetings will take place on: 1/8/19 Supporting Student Progress in Reading using the CCLS 2/12/19 Supporting Student Progress in Writing using the CCLS 3/12/19 Supporting Student Progress in English language using the CCLS Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Intermediate School 230 Borough Queens School Number 230 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ronald Zirin Coach Julie Nelkin ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yesenia Garcia Teacher/Subject Area Monica Le Clere/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Hannah Rosen/ELA Related-Service Provider Christina Nitsa Superintendent Dr. Phillip Composto Assistant Principal Donna Vitale Coach School Counselor Angelina Beato Parent Mahmuda Hosain Parent Coordinator Enrique Salazar Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1309 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 193 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.74%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Lang. N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As part of our curriculum, we administer Teachers College Reading and Writing unit-aligned pre and post assessments that track ELLs' progress towards the designated reading, writing, and language skills addressed in each unit and directly guide instructional planning. The data from these assessments shows that the majority of our ELL students across the grades are not yet demonstrating grade-level mastery in inferential reading comprehension of grade-level texts. In writing on-demands, the data reveals the focus skill for ELL students to be the explanation of text-based examples to support analysis of a text. Analysis of student work reveals that across the grade levels and proficiency levels, students articulate literal meaning of text-based evidence, often by repeating some of the same language of the text, but struggle to clearly articulate a connection of this evidence to their own thinking and analysis. After administering these curriculum-embedded assessments, teachers analyze student learning data and track student mastery in an item analysis, which is used in instructional planning to inform whole class lessons, as well as small group instruction, and individual student learning goals. Students publish written pieces throughout the units of study, which are organized in student learning portfolios. Throughout the course of the year, students 2018-19 CEP 58  reflect on their work to set goals for progress. Using peer-assessment, teacher feedback, and self-reflection, students track their progress towards their goals and write a reflection about the process and their progress. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The curriculum-embedded assessments are created, administered, and analyzed by grade level integrated ELA/ENL teams. The grade level integrated ELA/ENL teams have designated common planning time during their professional periods. During this common planning, teachers review assessment expectations, student learning data, and plan for the learning needs of students based on the assessment outcomes. ENL teachers meet in common planning as an ENL department to analyze data specific to the language needs of ELL students and plan to support those needs in both Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA. ENL teachers also meet in common planning with their grade level ELA team to analyze progress towards grade-level performance in English Language Arts and plan for modifications for ELL students. Through a shared Google Drive, teachers create and share resources designed to teach into the identified focus skills. Student mastery by focus skill is recorded in an item analysis shared on the Google Drive, and is recorded for both the pre-assessment and post-assessment to track individual and whole class progress towards mastery. The sequence of the Teachers College Reading and Writing units allow for focus skills to spiral across units for supplemental support, as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As our baseline and benchmark assessments, we administer the I-Ready Diagnostic & Instruction reading assessment. The diagnostic assessment provides valuable student learning data on individual student progress in the four assessments administered over the course of the schoolyear. The diagnostic assessment is adaptive in that it adjusts based on students' ability to answer each question. The result of this assessment is the students' independent reading level as measured by lexile, with grade-level performance of each of the following skills: literary reading comprehension, informational reading comprehension, vocabulary, phonological awareness, and phonics. I-Ready aggregates student learning data in individual student reports and class reports with lexile levels and grade-level performance on each of the aforementioned skills. An analysis of our school's summative assessment data shows that our ELL students require additional instruction in developing phonemic awareness, decoding academic vocabulary in context, synthesizing information in one or across two texts, and inferring in both informational and literary texts. As a complement to the I-Ready Diagnostic & Instruction assessment, we also administer the Standards Mastery standards-aligned assessment throughout the schoolyear. The Standards Mastery assessment measures students' mastery of grade-level standards. The assessment data derived from the Standards Mastery measures students' performance and growth on the grade level Common Core Learning Standards. I-Ready aggregates student performance from the Standards Mastery to create an item analysis by grade-level standard assessed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on student performance on the I-Ready diagnostic, the I-Ready system constructs an individualized list of skills to address and lessons to reinforce and practice these identified skills. Teachers have access to this aggregation of data through the I-Ready system. Common planning teams with ENL and ELA teachers meeting during allocated professional periods to analyze student performance on the summative assessments across the grade and within a class to identify areas for continued growth. This process is vital in tracking trends across classes, identifying subgroup performance, and constructing targeted foci for small group instruction. Instructional coaches and school administration have access to school wide data to track trends across classes and grades to inform programmatic adjustments, including curricular pacing calendars, focus standards and skills within a unit of study, and assessed skills. Teachers have the capability to assign targeted lessons at an individualized level for the various skills for continued student growth towards the specified areas of focus. In Integrated ENL/ELA, co-teaching models include parallel lessons in which teachers address the same learning targets with varying levels of support to provide entry points for all students. Co-teaching models also include alternate lessons, in which teachers address differentiated learning targets within their respective groups. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 CEP 59  N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use NYSESLAT and NYS ELA as outcome assessments to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The data from the NYSESLAT reveals that the majority of our ELL population is comprised of developing and long-term ELLs. In both of these subgroups, analysis of language modality performance indicates higher levels of proficiency in the oral language modalities of speaking and listening than in the written modalities of reading and writing. This particular data is important in determining the service of integrated ENL within the content area of ELA to provide additional support to our ELLs in developing English language in reading and in writing. This data is also used to inform curricular pacing and planning that purposefully integrates oral language into units of study, launching with videos and classroom discussions to help negotiate language before delving deeper into the reading of higher level texts and writing of formal responses and essays. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Prior to the start of the schoolyear, NYSESLAT performance data is used to program students in classes with the mandated amount of service hours, as per CR Part 154-2. For general education ELLs, we program grade-level classes with an intended progression of English language proficiency. Our -04 classes are designated for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning students in that grade level, who receive ENL service in both stand alone ENL and integrated ELA/ENL. Our -05 classes consist of current Expanding ELLs and recently exited Commanding ELLs with ENL service provided in 4 periods of ELA/ENL. Our -06 classes are made up of recently exited Commanding ELLs mixed with non-entitled students with ENL service provided in 2 periods of ELA/ENL. This programmatic model allows for students to progress between different types and amounts of ENL service, as determined by their English language proficiency levels and allows students to transition smoothly into classes with their grade-level peers. For students with disabilities, programmatic decisions are made to meet the individualized needs of each student as per their Individualized Education Plan and their English language proficiency. The data from the outcome assessments is shared with the whole staff at the beginning of the year in a meeting discussing ENL service and proficiency levels. Content area teachers of English Language Learners use this data to create small groups and partnerships of students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students with a proficiency level of Entering and Emerging receive four 45 minute periods of Standalone ENL per week. Standalone ENL classes are grouped by grade and are taught by a TESOL-certified teacher. Students with a proficiency level of Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning also receive eight 45 minute periods of Integrated ENL within the ELA content per week. Students with a proficiency level of Expanding receive a minimum of four 45 minute periods of Integrated ENL within the ELA content per week. Students with a proficiency level of Commanding within the past two years receive two 45 minute periods of Integrated ENL within the ELA content area per week. Integrated ENL/ELA classes are grouped heterogeneously and are grouped by grade. Integrated ENL/ELA classes are collaboratively taught by one TESOL-certified teacher and one ELA-certified teacher. Students are programmed with block scheduling by grade and proficiency level, following the following programmatic progression. Our -04 classes are designated for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning students in that grade level, who receive ENL service in both stand alone ENL and integrated ENL/ELA. Our -05 classes consist of current Expanding ELLs and recently exited Commanding ELLs with ENL service provided in 4 periods of ENL/ELA. Our -06 classes are made up of recently exited Commanding ELLs mixed with non-entitled students with ENL service provided in 2 periods of ENL/ELA. This programmatic model 2018-19 CEP 60  allows for students to progress between different types and amounts of ENL service, as determined by their English language proficiency levels and transition smoothly into classes with grade-level peers. For students with disabilities, programmatic decisions are made to meet the individualized needs of each student as per their Individualized Education Plan and their English language proficiency. This program model also allows the same TESOL-certified teacher to provide ENL in the integrated ENL/ELA setting with the same ELA-certified content area teacher for students within that grade, promoting collaborative planning and collaborative teaching. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are scheduled for ENL and ELA in their program according to the mandated number of instructional minutes for their proficiency level. Entering students will be provided 360 minutes of ENL services per week: 180 in Stand-Alone class and 180 in a co-taught ENL/ELA class. Emerging students will be provided 360 minutes of ENL services per week: 180 in Stand-Alone class and in a co-taught ENL/ELA class. Transitioning students will be provided 180 minutes of ENL services per week in a co-taught ENL/ELA class. Expanding students will be provided 180 minutes of ENL services per week in a co-taught ENL/ELA class. Commanding students will be provided 90 minutes of ENL services per week in a co-taught ENL/ELA class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For current English language learners and former ELLs who have exited within two years, the ELA content area is collaboratively taught with a TESOL-certified teacher to provide language support within the content of English language arts. Content instruction in the other core contents is delivered to ELL students by teachers in their NYS-licensed subject-specific content areas. Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL and the core content areas are taught primarily in English to best meet the needs of our students with a diverse range of home languages. Instruction is strengthened with methods to support language acquisition, including translanguaging to the home language. Instructional approaches include modeling using the document cameras through the SMARTBoards and Promethean Boards, scaffolding through partner work, group work, and guided practice. Specific methods include the use of sentence stems for speaking and writing, seating in groups, home language partnerships for turn-and-talks, which enable ELL students to meet the content demands of the New York State Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? New admits whose home language is Spanish are evaluated, upon enrollment, using the Spanish LAB-R. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Students with Interrupted Formal Education are targeted in math and ELA AIS groups for supplemental support. During these periods, teachers work with students on supporting foundational skills in both math and English language arts. Students with SIFE status are provided with technology in the form of Chromebooks and iPads to support translanguaging between the home language and English both in reception and production. I-Ready has a feature, in which lessons and texts are read aloud to students for students with emergent literacy in English. B. Materials and instruction are differentiated for newcomer students to provide students access to grade-level content 2018-19 CEP 61  material. Outlines and short texts are provided for students in both their home language in the target language of English to promote use of the first language in accessing grade-level comprehension and analysis. In ENL, newcomers have access to Chromebooks, enabling them to translate online sources, teaching resources on Google classroom, and vocabulary. Newcomer students are seated in home language partnerships to encourage translanguaging and discussion about class topics. Differentiated texts with modified supports, including word boxes, translations, and pictures are created for newcomers to access grade-level curriculum in Integrated ENL/ELA. C. Developing ELLs are supported with scaffolds, such as sentence stems for speaking and writing to prompt language, outlines to organize writing, and leveled questions for prompting analysis and discussion. Throughout the students' English language progression, these scaffolds are slowly removed to promote independence. The use of modified texts using resources such as NewsELA enable developing ELLs to read about grade level content at their independent reading level in English. NewsELA also includes Spanish texts to assist in bridging understanding of content. D. Long Term ELL status is a determining factor in designating AIS groups for supplemental support. Long Term ELLs are partnered with recently exited Commanding ELLs in the classroom to elevate the level of language in speaking and writing. Long Terms ELLs are provided with resources including academic vocabulary lists, transitional phrases, and revision checklists. Learning activities for Long Term ELLs include classroom discussions about texts and current events to promote verbal articulation, response to literature in the form of essays, and annotation of complex texts. E. Former ELLs receive continuing transitional support within ENL/ELA, featuring individual and small group conferences with an ENL teacher in integrated ENL focusing on the use of advanced and varied vocabulary, and conventions of grammar, including sentence syntax, irregular verb conjugation. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use differentiated scaffolds and instructional strategies to provide access to the grade-level core content curriculum, while supporting English language development. A word of the week routine is incorporated into classroom teaching to explicitly teach and practice high-leverage Tier II and Tier III vocabulary words. Over the course of a unit of study, teachers will scaffold the level of text complexity to provide entry points for all students, while progressing toward the grade-level standard of comprehension and analysis. Teachers of ELL-SWDs engage students in shared readings of texts using a document camera with a visual model of annotations. As the unit progresses, students will engage in book clubs or read short texts that are increasingly complex to build language. To support reading of complex texts, students have access to MackinVIA with a wide range of e-books and audio books. ELL-SWD students conduct the writing process digitally using Google Classroom and Google Drive, where teachers give in-the-moment feedback to students. The use of digital drafting allows for revision and editing in a quick and clear manner. As a critical part of the writing process, students are provided differentiated outlines to organize writing in various formats, with varying levels of support. Students also have access to language stems, which are used in both speaking to negotiate language with a partner or teacher, and in writing. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have parallel programming for classes of ELL-SWDs to create flexibility for students to receive the appropriate ENL services for their respective English language proficiency, as per CR Part 154.2. ENL teachers who collaboratively teach with SWD teachers in both the self-contained and ICT setting participate in the same grade level ENL/ELA common planning teams. Through this collaborative planning and teaching structure, teachers look closely at the students' individualized learning goals as outlined in their IEPs and plan to support the language required to meet these goals. The LRE (Least Restricted Environment) committee reviews the students' progress in ENL and ELA and determines if the student can be mainstreamed in a least restricted ELA class that is also supported by an ENL teacher based upon the child's progress, current performance level, and IEP goals. Our school utilizes Teachers College Reading and Writing units of study as our Students work in small groups based on assessments, language development, and reading and writing data for intense instruction in required skills. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 62  Using data from the I-Ready diagnostic assessment and pre and post on-demands, teachers focus instruction on reading and writing and/or math skills in their AIS periods within their content. To meet the grade level New York Learning Standards in the content areas, Entering students are encouraged to engage in translanguaging. This process can be teacher-student, student-students, or student-self, enabling resources, texts, questions, verbal and written responses to be translanguaged to the home language, enabling the student to engage in grade-level learning. Emerging students are encouraged to use texts, resources, questions, prompts, and verbal and written responses in both their home language and in the target language of English. Using technology of the Chromebooks, students are able to read side-by-side in their L1 and L2 to build from their home language to the target language. During AIS periods, the teachers use this time to differentiate their instruction in the content area in a small group setting. In ELA and math, students rotate through an I-Ready learning station, which targets individualized learning skills using the diagnostic data. After taking a diagnostic assessment, the I-Ready program provides lessons with targeted skills and strategies at the students' present level of performance. For entering students and SIFE, I-Ready offers lessons focused on phonemic awareness, phonics, and vocabulary that include an audio component to bridge reading in English. After taking a diagnostic assessment, the I-Ready program provides lessons with targeted skills and strategies at the students' present level. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data from our formative pre-assessments, academic vocabulary presents a challenge for our ELL students at all proficiency levels. We are considering integrating the use of Flocabulary to supplement vocabulary instruction across the content areas. Based on analysis of our benchmark assessments through i-Ready, our data indicates that an area of continued improvement for our ELL students is building inferential understanding of both literary and informational texts. To help support comprehension of complex texts, we are considering integrated the use of ACHIEVE 3000 or myON, which would provide students with texts at different levels based on their current level of performance. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are invited to participate in the Arts and Literacy after school program, which is held Monday through Friday and offers both academic and non-academic programs. An invitation and application is distributed to all students, with translated versions available. Arts and Literacy staff members circulate at the beginning of the year to inform students of the programs offered. ELLs are invited to participate in Saturday Academy, which offers targeted intervention for ENL/ELA and math for all students. ELLs are offered priority spaces in Saturday Academy when invitations are distributed prior to the start of the program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to meet the needs of all ELLs, including newcomers, SIFE, students with disabilities, and long-term ELLs, the following instructional and technological materials are used across classrooms: SMART Boards and Promethean Boards for whole class instruction. Classrooms are equipped with document cameras for shared readings, to project annotations, and model learning activities. Our English language learners have access to chromebooks paired with Google Apps for Education, which allow students to conduct the writing process digitally and receive feedback in-the-moment from peers and teachers, as well as translate texts, questions, and prompts into their home language for support as needed. Integrated ENL/ELA classrooms stock a multicultural classroom library with grade and interest-level materials that reflect cultures from around the world, as well as a bilingual library. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, classrooms are equipped with ENL libraries which contain books at the appropriate age and reading levels of our ELL students. The libraries contain books that reflect the various cultures, the "new immigrant" experience and bilingual books as well. In math, science, and social studies, bilingual word-to-word glossaries are available in the students' home languages, and bilingual picture dictionaries. Textbooks and workbooks are available in Spanish, other languages are provided upon request and availability. Texts and other supplemental materials are available in Spanish due to the large number of Spanish-speaking ELL students. Students are encouraged to use translanguaging through technology, where they can translate articles and texts 2018-19 CEP 63  and have them side-by-side. Students are also encouraged to use Google translate to scaffold productive language in speaking and writing. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all resources correspond to the age and grade level of students by utilizing resources such as NewsELA to provide students with grade-level content that is accessible at varying reading levels. Through the use of technology, students are able to translate grade-level content and texts to their home language. Thematic planning around a common topic allows students to build knowledge across the unit in the content areas. The school ensures that all required services and resources aligned to the content area curricula and grade level Common Core standards. Texts are rigorous, rich with academic vocabulary and aligned with the content area curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Throughout the school year, all newly enrolled ELLs will be informed of the curriculum and the expectations of middle school students. The ELLs that enroll before the school year will be invited to an open house that include the expectations as well as a tour of the building. The guidance counselor, Ms. Beato, meets with new admits and their parents to discuss class placement. ENL and ELA teachers use a buddy system to partner newly enrolled ELLs with students who speak their home language and can help to translate directions, prompts, and questions. The guidance counselor, Ms. Beato, meets with the student and parent to discuss class placement. As academic support for students who enroll throughout the year, ENL teachers help new admits to set up a resource section in their notebook. These first pages include introductory vocabulary, including basic schools words, phrases to ask for help, and basic content words. Students work with home language partners to translate words and phrases and are encouraged to refer to this section as a resource throughout the year. For students who enter with a higher level of English language proficiency, a resource section is still created, with different types of supports, including high-leverage vocabulary words, sentence stems for speaking and writing, lists of synonyms for common words. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time the entire school, in select classes, receive Spanish as their language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers will attend professional development workshops provided by the Queens North Field Support Center. New teachers of ELLs are given professional development on ENL strategies and methodologies, including New Teacher Institute for Teachers of ELLs and Scaffoling Writing for ELLs. The payroll secretary maintains the teacher files and records of the 2018-19 CEP 64  professional development workshops attended. Professional Development opportunities for all staff to cover these topics will include, assistant principals, the ENL coordinator and ENL teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinator. During designated Monday PD time, paraprofessionals have targeted professional development through Master Teacher for Para Educators. Part of their PD cycle includes professional development targeting the instruction of ELL-SWDs.Teachers of ELLs are sent to Teachers College for professional development sessions that focus on meeting the needs of English language learners in the curriculum. Teachers of ELLs are sent to ELL-related PDs about supporting ELLs in content areas. All personnel who work with ELL students attend professional development on the integration of appropriate ENL strategies to engage all ELL students in reaching the Common Core Learning Standards in all content areas. The content area teachers and ENL teachers meet during their common planning periods to discuss the needs of our ELL population. During the professional development days (Election Day and Chancellor's Day), the teachers receive content-specific training on how to support ELLs in meeting the content standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers will attend professional development workshops provided by the Queens North Field Support Center. New teachers of ELLs are given professional development on ENL strategies and methodologies, including New Teacher Institute for Teachers of ELLs and Scaffolding Writing for ELLs. ENL teachers attend professional development at Teachers College around topics surrounding language support and acquisition. ENL teachers attend the ELL PD during Chancellor's conference days.To meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, we will offer a professional development series on Professional Development Mondays, as per UFT contract. Material covered will include emphasis on constructing aligned content and language objectives as well as co-teaching models and practices. Agendas and attendance for these meetings will be maintained in the Professional Development Activities binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the Tuesday Parent Outreach time, the ENL teachers will conduct individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss language proficiency results of the NYSESLAT and language skills and development. To invite parents, teachers will send home a letter in English and the parents' preferred language translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit with options for date and time of the meeting. As needed, ENL teachers will make arrangements with the Translation and Interpretation Unit or school-based interpreters ahead of time. During the meeting, teachers will explain the English language proficiency score the student received from the most recent NYSESLAT or NYSITELL, as well as their progress from the previous year(s), as applicable. Teachers will discuss the students' target language modalities and strategies to support the student's language development at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Mr. Salazar, Parent Coordinator, coordinates Pot Luck Night and all PTA meetings in collaboration with the PTA co-presidents, as well as an Urban Advantage trip to the zoo in the springtime. Parents of ELLs are invited and encouraged to attend our annual Career Day to share about different professions. Parents of ELLs are also invited to attend the Science Night with their children, hosted at the Museum of Natural History's at the Hayden Planetarium. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are invited and encouraged to join the PTA and attend school functions. The parent coordinator is available for translation for those that speak Spanish. Parent Volunteers translate for any additional languages that may be needed at these functions. 2018-19 CEP 65  Parents are invited to attend school events including the school musical, art show, talent show, band, chorus, and guitar concerts, performances of the national anthem at Citi Field. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ron Zirin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: IS 230 School DBN: 30Q230 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ronald Zirin Title Principal Donna Vitale Assistant Principal Enrique Salazar Parent Coordinator Yesenia Garcia ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mahmuda Hosain Parent Monica Le Clere/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Hannah Rosen/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Julie Nelkin Coach Coach Angelina Beato School Counselor Dr. Phillip Composto Cristina Nitsa Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q230 School Name: I.S. 230 Superintendent: Dr. Philip Comp The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Donna Vitale Assistant Principal No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. I.S. 230 uses the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) and Place of Birth Report (RPOB) from ATS that denotes each student’s home language. In addition, we use the Home Language Survey (HLIS) for all of our incoming students. This is the data that we use to assess the language preferences of the parent community for both oral and written communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian 1 .05 1 0.05 2018-19 CEP 69  Arabic Bengali Burmese Chinese - Any Cantonese Gujarati Hindi Korean Mandarin Nepali English Punjabi Polish Slovak Spanish Tibetan Turkish Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese 4 210 3 30 0 3 5 4 0 13 1000 21 2 1 871 8 1 20 1 2 0.18 9.55 0.14 1.36 0 0.14 0.23 0.18 0 0.59 45.45 .95 0.09 0.05 39.59 0.36 .05 0.91 0.05 0.09 4 211 3 26 1 2 5 4 2 13 988 27 2 1 878 8 1 18 3 2 0.18 9.59 0.14 1.18 0.05 0.09 0.23 0.18 0.09 0.59 44.91 1.23 0.09 0.05 39.91 0.36 .05 0.82 0.14 0.09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 70  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Parent-Teacher Conferences Notification Notifications will be distributed approximately one week before the scheduled conferences, scheduled for: November 30, 2017 March 6, 2017, May 9, 2017 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Before each parent-teacher conference, we will send home a letter inviting families to join us for parent-teacher conferences. These letters will state the date and the times of the conferences. The Parent Teacher Conference Template provided by the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to translate for languages, which are not available for in-house translation by staff. Annual ENL Parent Meeting Invitation On-going throughout the course of the school year We invite parents of our English language learners to attend an 2018-19 CEP 71  individual meeting to discuss the language growth and goals of their children on an on-going basis over the course of the school year. At the beginning of the school year, the invitation is submitted to the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services to Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. The letter will be distributed to parents in English and in the home language, whenever available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 72  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Parent-Teacher Conferences The parent-teacher conferences are scheduled for: November 30, 2017 March 6, 2017, May 9, 2017 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have a number of staff who are bilingual in languages including Spanish, Bengali, Hindi, and Punjabi. These staff are available during the parent-teacher conferences to interpret for families who prefer to hold the conference in their home language. For those languages that are not available for interpretation by in-house staff, staff will utilize the over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Annual ENL Parent Meeting On-going throughout the course of the school year Annual ENL parent meetings will take place during the designated 2018-19 CEP 73  parent outreach time on Tuesday afternoons. We have a number of staff who are bilingual in languages including Spanish, Bengali, Hindi, and Punjabi. These staff are often available, with notice, during the Tuesday parent outreach time to interpret for families who prefer to hold the meeting in their home language. For those languages that are not available for interpretation by in-house staff, staff will utilize the over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 74  Using the Phone Master system, we will notify parents in English and in Spanish in the event of a school emergency. Students will be provided with a letter explaining the situation in detail in English and in the primary home languages represented in the school. In the case of a school emergency, school staff will be on hand to translate. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, we allocate time during the designated Monday professional development time to review important policies and procedures, including Chancellor's Regulation A-663. All staff are given a hard copy of the document and the resources, including instructions for how to access the NYC DOE's over-the-phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) There are Welcome Posters in various languages at the main entrance. All staff, the Parent Coordinator & School Safety have a Language ID Guide to assist the parents. In addition, the principal sends home a letter, in various languages, informing the parents of the availability of interpretation and translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator sends home a survey to families regarding the quality and availability of translation and other services that the school provides. In addition, ENL teachers will incorporate feedback about communication with parents at the close of their annual ENL meeting through an online Google Forms account, which is translatable into any language available through Google Translate. The Google Forms will aggregate parent responses and will be considered in improving communication with parents who speak languages other than English. 2018-19 CEP 75 
