2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75Q233 School Name: P.S. Q233 Principal: DEBBIE EDMONDS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.233Q 307500014233 K-12 School Number (DBN): 75Q233 91-30 Metropolitan Avenue, Forest Hills NY 11537 718 2864712 Phone Number: 718 2864701 Fax: Debbie Edmonds dedmond@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Debbie Edmonds Sherwin Persaud Belinda Velez Pamela Gaynor N/A William Ramirez Michael Glover N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 802-1501 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens/District 75 Jude Arthur FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 400 1 st Avenue New York, NY 10010 jArthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1662 Phone Number: 212-802-1527 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debbie Edmonds Sherwin Persaud Belinda Velez Janelle Stone N/A William Ramirez Michael Glover N/A Lorraine Safuto Shaquana DeShields Keith Bowen *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pamela Gaynor Leona Fowler Han Man Carey Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.233Q is to provide rigorous and relevant instruction to our diversified community of learners. Effective communication skills and improving student's ability to advocate for themselves are essential in what is emphasized and taught both in and out of the classroom. Students are encouraged to develop a strong work ethic, take ownership of learning, and act as responsible citizens in their home and school communities. Additionally, students are encouraged to use self-determination skills to set and achieve personal goals. All students are 2018-19 CEP 9  encouraged to improve personal academic behaviors (executive functioning skills) so, as older students, they are better equipped to explore career and post high school options through on site and off site vocational experiences. As an important member of the school community, parents are encouraged to share in decision making, participate in meetings specific to their child, attend celebratory happenings, and take advantage of support and informative events range of all learning experiences regardless of obstacles as the result of physical, social-emotional and academic needs. We Believe:  We are all life-long learners  All students can learn  Effective communication skills are an essential component of life  Teachers must provide meaningful, relevant, authentic, rigorous instruction  Teachers work best in supportive, professional, collaborative learning communities  The best decisions are made with the input of students, parents, staff and meaningful data  Reflection and inquiry are integral components to learning Student Mission Statement: "Don't let the fear of striking out hold you back." — Babe Ruth I believe that I can learn and successfully accomplish my goals. I am a valued member to my home, school, and local community. I will respectfully and cooperatively work with teachers, classmates, and my family to become the best person I can be. UDL School Wide Message: #ICAN Be Present! Be Positive! and Be a Champion! I can demonstrate greater independence in my choice to develop a strong work ethic. I can be a capable learner in my choice to achieve my learning targets. I can be an awesome leader in my choice to monitor what I say and do. I can be non-stop in my choice to be the best person I can be This document was created using the Guiding Principles from the NYSED "Blueprint for Improved Results for Students with Disabilities", which served as a frame of reference. In addition, we aligned the school goals to the New York State ESSA goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P233Q has over 500 students in grades K-12. The students attend one of eight sites throughout the borough of Queens. Five of the eight sites are housed in community schools and two are situated in self-contained buildings. Three of the eight P233Q sites are high schools, three are middle schools and two are elementary schools, one elementary site opened in September 2014 and the second just opened in September 2017. 2018-19 CEP 10  Three of the eight sites have inclusion programs including two of our high school sites and one middle school site. P233Q maintains a strong partnership with its general education colleagues so as to provide equitable access for all students and to promote learning opportunities for staff across organizations. P233's teachers are committed to the success of their students, classrooms, and the school at large. Understanding the importance of "collaborative teachers", we have established and maintained a "committee" model, this model has truly become part of 233Q's 'DNA'. Established committees are designed to have a cohort representative from every site and/or class ratio. The facilitators assist in disseminating information, problem solving and working with administrators to make decisions about implementation criteria and expectations. The current list of teams include: Curriculum, Data Inquiry, Assessment (NYSAA and SANDI/FAST) Senior Advisory, Middle School Stepping Up, Technology, Attendance, Get Ready To Learn, Social Express, and the School Improvement Team. This year, we have added a Vocational-Transitional Committee, Learning Partners, a Para Professional Institute, and a Professional Learning Council. The facilitators bring information back to their site colleagues where they meet regularly during "common planning time". This allows us to address the NYS ESSA goal of professional development opportunities and critical conversations in the various areas of teaching practices. Our related service providers and ENL teachers support students through the collaborative push in model, understanding that their role is to assist student's in accessing the curriculum and generalizing skills. Post secondary outcomes are a priority for P233. In addition to our inclusion programs, students over 18 have the opportunity to participate in vocational/job site programs. P233 partners with several adult care facilities, a food pantry, multiple CVS locations, and a TJ Max. We also have several "in house" vocational/job site programs, to include a card shop, three full functioning cooking programs, recycling/sustainability, BJ's, Petland, and Trader Joes. Our students also have the opportunity to participate in summer youth employment, Coop tech, and the Promise program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our diversified student body spans across class ratios, to include 12:1:4, 12:1:1, 6:1:1, 8:1:1, and Inclusion. Students range in ages 5 through 21. Classifications include, but are not limited to autism, intellectual disabilities, multiple disabilities, social emotional disabilities, speech and language impairments, and sensory impairments. All of our students, with the exception of some of our Inclusion students, are alternately assessed. 120 of our students are identified as ENL. Each student, beyond class ratios and classifications, presents with a host of special needs, which are address. These include, but are not limited to, alternative communication systems, to allow them to participate to their fullest potential; sensory integration strategies, to assist them in managing within their environments and self regulating their behaviors to be able to receive information; individually designed behavior plans that allow for students to be actively engaged in their own behaviors, choices, and consequences; and differentiated instructional strategies to allow students to engage with the same content as their non-disabled peers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P233Q has made the most progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction this past year, addressing the Framework for Great Schools elements and the New York State ESSA goal of providing access for all to a rigorous standards-based curriculum. P233Q designs and uses its own adapted curriculum to address the Common Core Learning Standards, driven by the Essential Elements of the CCLS, as well as Career Readiness Skills. The P233Q curriculum for Socials Studies and Science are grade band specific, aligned to the NYC Frameworks, and are used organizationally, across sites, to promote instructional cohesion. Through our customized curriculum, students learn core content, functional reading and math skills; vocational skills, and personal behaviors - character education skills. The curriculum has evolved over the years, to best meet the academic, social-emotional and transitional needs of each student, decisions have been made based on data and teacher feedback. Most recently, we 2018-19 CEP 11  have added pre-unit and post-unit assessments. Teachers will use this data to further inform their instruction and the Curriculum Committee will use the results to inform them of any adjustments that may need to be made to the modules. This practice aligns to the NYS ESSA goal of accountability based academic and non-academic measures, and annual student growth to identify root causes. P233's school wide instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to improve vocational opportunities for students across all grades and class ratios. As it is related to a "supportive environment", it is important that students feel both supported and challenged by their teachers and peers and that we prepare students for a variety of post secondary opportunities. Our annual needs assessment survey, which is completed by all teachers, para professionals, and related service providers, indicated a strong need and desire to expand both our community and in house vocational training programs. To further support this initiative, we have created a new committee, with a representative from every site. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q233 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 514 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 84.6% % Reduced Lunch 26.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.3% 28.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 86.7% 0.2% 100.0% 32.5% 16.9% 5.8% 8 16% 9.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In keeping with the Framework for Great Schools Element of Rigorous Instruction, and the New York State ESSA Goals of providing access for all to a rigorous, standards-based curriculum, P233 is intentional about creating instruction that is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards by way of the Essential Elements. During the 2017-2018 school year the Curriculum committee create pre and post assessment rubrics specific for each instructional Social Studies Module. The expectation was that students would increase a minimum of 3 indicator points, between the pre and the post assessments, following direct instruction on the unit of focus. This also addresses the New York State ESSA goal of using accountability based measures to track student growth. The need for unit pre and post assessments came about given teacher feed back noting that created units of study did not have a system in place to assess prior content knowledge and or measure student learning over the course of the unit. This measure of student learning will provide intermittent feedback to students, parent and teachers. Student learning will be measured with each completed module. Student outcomes and measured growth will be reported with each progress report. Based on our summative data, for the 17-18 School year, the students had the following outcomes for Social Studies:  High School Students: Overall increase of 7 indicator points between the pre and post assessments  Middle School Students: Overall increase of 7 indicator points between the pre and post assessments  Elementary Students: Overall increase of 5 indicator points between the pre and post assessments For the 2018-2019 School Year, we will be expanding the pre and post assessments to include the Science Curriculum, which will be created by the P233 Curriculum Committee. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, 80% of students in elementary, middle and high school alternate assessment classes will demonstrate improved Science content understanding as evidenced by an increase of 3 indicator points between the pre and post assessments module assessments. Progress will be monitored by the Data Inquiry Team. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan  The P233Q Data Inquiry Team will analyze the assessment results from the 2017-2018 Social Studies module assessments and the SANDI-FAST assessment data to share with the Curriculum Committee to assist in making informed decisions when creating the Science modules and unit assessments.  Curriculum Committee will develop November- All alternate assessment students September 2018 December Science Module and unit assessments using the NYC Science Scope and Sequence resource as well as the Essential Elements of the CCLS. All alternate assessment students October 2018 Data Inquiry Team; 9 teachers 2 administrators Curriculum Committee; 9 teachers 2 Administrators  Common Planning meetings will be held at each site to introduce the module. Teachers and Instructional Support teachers will collaborate to unit plan and identify a culminating event to showcase Science learning projects.  Classroom teachers, speech teachers, IST's, and ENL teachers will meet during common planning, at the start of each unit to identify specific instructional strategies to support ELL students and students with significant language impairments. To include what visual supports and scaffolding would be beneficial to each specific unit of study. All alternate assessment students September 2018-May 2019 Site based teacher team meetings, AP's, and Instructional Support Teachers All alternate assessment students Classroom teachers, speech teachers, ENL teachers Data Inquiry Team; 9 teachers 2 administrators September 2018-May 2019 October 2018  The DIT will create a year long action plan to guide the site based Inquiry team meetings. All alternate assessment students 2018-19 CEP 16   Site based Inquiry teams will meet monthly to review student progress toward meeting their learning goals. All alternate assessment students October-May 18-19  Our middle school science clusters will visit the elementary and high schools sites to share best practices specific to the Science Module. All alternate assessment students November-December 2018  Teachers will create interactive smart board Vizzle activities and books with the appropriate modifications and reinforcers for their students and share via the Vizzle platform.  Students will be engaged in Project Based Learning and Community Based Instruction to further support real world application and comprehension of Science learning targets.  Sites will host a Science "culminating" event at the end of each instructional module, to include, October, December, February, April, and June. Additionally, sites will celebrate Earth Day.  Teachers will administer post Science unit assessment and submit both pre and post assessments to DIT. All alternate assessment students September-June All alternate assessment students September-June All alternate assessment students September-June All alternate assessment students December 2018 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, IST's, AP's, and speech teachers (3) middle school science clusters; Instructional support teachers All classroom teachers, Science clusters, ENL teachers, IST's, and Speech teachers All classroom teachers, Science clusters, ENL teachers, IST's and Speech teachers All classroom teachers, Science clusters, ENL teachers, IST's and Speech teachers Classroom teachers and Science Clusters Data Inquiry Team; 9 teachers 2 administrators DIT and Curriculum Committees 2018-19 CEP 17  DIT will meet to review outcomes of the pre and posts November-December Science assessment modules. All alternate assessment students January 2019  The DIT will share their finding from the analysis of the pre and post assessment modules with the Curriculum Committee to allow for any necessary adjustments to the March-April Science Module.  Each site will host a Science Fair, with students and teachers sharing projects and activities with each other and with guests.  DIT will compile and analyze data from the March-April Science Module including a comparison of the November-December and March-April modules. All 233 staff and students All alternate assessment students January 2019 Data Inquiry Team; 9 teachers 2 administrators All alternate assessment students All alternate assessment students March 2019 Early June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive progress reports 4 times per year (including summer), with more detailed accounts of student learning in relation to Social Studies and Science, in addition to a report of progress on their specific IEP goals. The progress reports will also include individualized comments from classroom teachers, related service providers, and ENL teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teacher monies will be put aside specifically for teacher coverages to allow all members of the curriculum and DIT members to participate in monthly meetings during the school days. In having representatives from all 8 sites, it is challenging to have after school meetings. In addition, monies will be used to purchase needed materials for professional development, as well as specific "tools" to support the instructional modules. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 80% of students in elementary, middle and high school alternate assessment classes will demonstrate improved Science content understanding as evidenced by an increase of 1.5 indicator points between the pre and post November-December assessments module assessments. Progress will be monitored and analyzed by the Data Inquiry Team. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The P233 Science Pre and Post Unit Assessment Rubrics for November-December and March-April, will serve as the instrument of measure for this goal. Mid-Year Progress: With respect to our Rigorous Instruction goal, we have already exceeded our expectations of an overall increase of 3 indicator points between the pre and post assessments in the area of Science. This includes our three grades bands of elementary, middle and high schools, our three instructional levels, and our four class ratios. Our greatest gains were seen with our instructional level C students, at all grade bands and class ratios. Further analysis of the data revealed and supported a well know educational understanding, which is the importance of prior knowledge. In all grade bands, instructional levels, and class ratios, students showed less of an increase between the pre and post assessment in our November-December module then they did in our January-February module. The reason for this is that students had more prior knowledge of the content of the January-February module, thus scoring higher on the pre assessment, resulting in less of an increase between the pre and post assessments. This further supported our decision to compare the pre and post assessments within a given unit of study rather than comparing one unit to another. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P233 understands the importance for everyone to work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, increasing student independence, and preparing students for success in school and beyond. This is in alignment with the element of Supportive Environment element of the Framework for Great Schools, the New York State ESSA goal of ensuring student access to support for social emotional well-being, as well as the New York State Blueprint for students with disabilities, which states that schools will provide high quality inclusive programs, which is evident when educators use the full continuum of services to ensure that students with disabilities are educated in the least restrictive environment appropriate. In order to achieve this, it is necessary to move students along the continuum to least restrictive environments. This includes, when appropriate, recommending students to be re-evaluated to a less restrictive class settings; reducing related service mandates as a result of a clear vision of the collaborative/push in model, which allows related service providers to train and support classroom staff in the specific needs and modifications for students, thus reducing the need for 1:1 services; and lastly, the reduction/termination of 1:1 para professionals, as a result of strong behavior intervention plans, a team approach, and data collection. A comparative review between our final 17-18 CEP results in this area to the SESIS reports for the incoming students served as evidence that this goal is necessary for our school. The final school data for the 2017-2018 school year indicated an overall reduction of 18% in support services throughout the P.233Q organization. •18% of students mandated for speech services had a reduction in services and/or termination services •18.5% of students mandated for occupational therapy services had a reduction in services and/or termination services •30% of students mandated for physical therapy services had a reduction in services and/or termination services •12% of students mandated for 1:1 Health paraprofessional had a reduction in services and/or termination services •9% of students mandated for 1:1 Crisis paraprofessional had a reduction in services and/or termination services •13% of students mandated for 1:1 Special Transportation paraprofessional had a reduction in services and/or termination services •24% of students in our Elementary Schools had an overall reduction in services -8% of students in our Middle Schools had an overall reduction in services -17% of students in our High Schools had an overall reduction in services 2018-19 CEP 20  -A student from a 6:1:1 class ratio to a 12:1:1 class ratio Although this is an area of success for P233, each year, as new students come into the program with heavier supports in place, it is necessary to keep this as a school wide goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in elementary, middle and high school alternate assessment classes will demonstrate improved social/emotional development and increased independence as evidenced by a 15% decrease in mandated individual 1:1 adult support and/or related service mandates. Progress will be monitored by administration, IST's, and related service providers. 2018-19 CEP 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Alternately assessed 12:1:1, 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 students September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, related service providers, counselors, IST's Administration, Instructional support teachers, related service providers, teachers, para- professionals, school based coach, Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Power of Choice and Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Strategies will be used to promote positive behavior supports in order to have students improve and maintain self-regulation skills. The Continuum of Service and the prescribed Standards of Practice for Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy and Speech Services will be used to guide decisions related to student progress and appropriate student mandates. students mandated for related/ October 2018- June 2019 support services The Get Ready to Learn program will be followed in 12:1:4, 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classes to enhance self-regulatory, attention, communication, and time on task behaviors for all students - weekly data will be kept to monitor student progress on targeted goals. All alternately assessed students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, para professionals Teachers will participate in on-going professional development in the implementation of specific sensory integration strategies using break boxes from Fun and Function. Teachers will record data daily for ten consecutive weeks on specific identified behaviors in order to monitor to effectiveness of strategies. All alternately assessed students October 2018- June 2019 Administration, Instructional support teachers, related service providers, teachers, para- professionals, school based coach 2018-19 CEP 22  Monthly Inquiry Based team meetings will be conducted to review data as well as monitor and discuss the effectiveness of selected strategies. All alternately assessed students September 2018-June 2019 At monthly Inquiry meetings, teachers will discuss and flag students for consideration for reduction in support services. Related service Mandated modification and de-certification tracking forms will be updated following each IEP meeting. September 2018-June 2019 All students with 1:1 support and related services students mandated for related services and 1:1 support staff October 2018- May 2019 October 2018- May 2019 Tracking forms will be reviewed and monitored at both monthly inquiry meetings as well as monthly faculty meetings Provide Professional Development opportunities for staff on issues related to positive behavior supports and ways to increase student independence. students mandated for related services and 1:1 support staff All alternately assessed students To ensure that appropriate and relevant professional development is available for all staff, P233 has created a new Professional Learning Council. All 233 staff February 2019 2018-19 CEP 23 related service providers, teachers, paraprofessionals, school based coach, guidance counselors Related service providers, administration, IST's Related service providers, administration, IST's Chanc. conf. days; site based common planning, cohort meetings Administration, Instructional support teachers, related service providers, teachers, school based coach, guidance counselors monthly PLC cohort meetings IST's, Principal, Assistant principals Data Inquiry Team All related service providers will complete our Mandate Modification/De-Certification Tracking Form. IST's will submit a "reduction in para professional support" tracking form for their sites. February 2019 Data Inquiry Team Related service providers IST's Teams will complete Functional Behavior Assessments (FBAs) for all students mandated for a 1:1 Crisis Management Paraprofessional and develop and implement appropriate Behavior Intervention Plans. BIP's will be reviewed and updated 3 times per year, with each report card or as needed. Students with 1:1 crisis management paras September 2018-June 2019 Designated teams will develop the P233Q curriculum to include instructional opportunities for students to improve social skills, participate in character building projects, demonstrate decision making skills and utilize self-regulatory behaviors. Alternately assessed students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional support teachers, related service providers, teachers, para- professionals, school based coach, guidance counselors P233 Curriculum Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. It is important that all members of the IEP team, including parents, understand that there are many ways a student can move to a Less Restrictive Environment (LRE). For some, it will be a reduction and/or termination in related support services and for others it will be a reduction in 1:1 behavioral supports. Parents will be an integral part of the decision making process when students are considered for a LRE. Parents will be informed of such considerations by way of parent trainings, feedback from collaborative team meetings, parent teacher conferences, written communication, via weekly teacher / student communication logs and notebooks, student reflection cards and telephone outreach. In some instances, paraprofessional many require additional training on how to employ strategies and record data for a specific "behavior modification" system. Parent feedback will be provided to coincide with student progress reports.  Parent Association Meetings and workshops will be scheduled throughout the year.  Related service providers will conduct parent workshops throughout the year  Parent schedules will be considered when planning IEP conference dates. Written progress reports will be sent to parents to keep them informed of their child’s progress three times during the school year.  The school's Transition Coordinator will host informational meetings and arrange tours for parents to visit over 21 programs. Interpreters will be provided during meetings and events as needed.   Teachers will communicate daily progress via a communication notebook  Parents will be informed of all district level and school based workshops 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Power of Choice and therapeutic crisis intervention program and training will be used to promote positive behaviors. 2. The continuum of services and prescribed standards of practice for occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy will be used to guide decisions related to students’ progress and appropriate student mandates. 3. Instructional funds will be used for The Get Ready to Learn program. 4. Related service funds will be used to provide additional adult support for students that need to improve in independence skills throughout the school day. 5. Instructional funds will be used to provide coverage for staff members to attend professional development workshops during the instructional day. 6. Instructional funds will be used to purchase and/or refill Fun and Function sensory break boxes for 100% of the 6:1:1 and 12:1:4 classes for middle and high schools classes, across sites, and for 100% of classes at the elementary site. 7. Monies will be used to allow for two facilitators to attend monthly Get Ready to Learn Professional Development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, our overall school data will demonstrate an 8 % reduction in 1:1 support and related service mandates. This data will be reviewed by our Data Inquiry Team to determine if we are on track to meeting the goal. If not, the team will review mandates and BIP's for students mandated for 1:1 para professionals and special transportation para professionals, to plan for specific team meetings to provide classes with additional supports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed and monitored using standard reports, mandate modification tracking forms, GRTL (Get Ready to Learn) data, SESIS, Behavior Intervention plans and supporting anecdotal notes, and weekly IEP data. Mid-Year Progress: For our Supportive Environment goal, at this mid-year point juncture, we are well on our way to meeting the goal. Our Instructional Support teachers as well as our Data Inquiry Team have been monitoring reductions in 1:1 health, crisis and transportation para professionals, as well as mandate modification for related services, to include counseling, occupational, physical and speech therapies. The new One Drive tracking forms 2018-19 CEP 25  proved to be very helpful. To date, we have an overall average reduction in support services of 12%. Our strongest numbers are coming from our middle schools, which supports our philosophy of reducing support services are students articulate into high school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P233 has been using the Essential Elements of the Common Core learning standards since 2014, understanding that it was necessary for our teachers, even for students who are alternately assessed, to address the CCLS in their instruction. It should be noted, that three year later, New York State also began to infuse the Essential Elements of the CCLS into NYSAA. The Curriculum Committee identified specific "power standards", for each grade band, for all of the ELA components. They also aligned these standards to our instructional modules and reflection modules to include three levels. These levels are based on the "essential thinking skills" criteria and the DOK. In light of the fact that New York State has adopted the Next Generation Learning Standards for the 2018-2019 school year, our curriculum team will be identifying specific changes from the CCLS and making adjustments to our Essential Elements documents. This practice is in direct alignment to the Framework for Great Schools element of collaborative teachers, as well as the NYS ESSA goals of access for all to a rigorous standards based curriculum, differentiated, flexible school, and collaborative. professional conversational opportunities. In addition, it aligns with the NYS Blueprint in the area of teachers providing research based instructional teaching and learning strategies and teachers providing specifically designed instruction to provide access for students with disabilities. Review of the NYC School Quality Guide survey for 2017-2018 for District 75 also impacted our decision to select this as an area of focus, as the report indicates that the area of "collaborative teachers" is an area in need of growth. Only 70% of the teachers surveyed said that "teachers take responsibility for improving the school". Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the P233 Curriculum Committee will collaborate to develop four units of study for both Social Studies and Science, with the Essential Elements of the Next Generation Learning Standards embedded. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The P233 Curriculum Committee will research Next Generation Learning standards and identify key changes/enhancements from the Common Core Learning Standards and design a template for the Essential Elements. Alternately assessed students October 2018 October 2018 Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers Alternately assessed students Alternately assessed students October 2018 Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers Alternately assessed students December 2018 Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers Create Social Studies and Science unit modules for November-December addressing amended essential elements in both instructional pacing calendar and assessment rubrics. Each representing a linkage between age appropriate content and leveled achievement standards. When creating modules, we address UDL principles, to include providing multiple means of expression, based on each student's preferred mode of communication; multiple means of access, addressing both physical and cognitive abilities; and multiple means of engagement, through hands on, project based activities, small group activities, highly motivating activities, and community based experiences. Each representative from the Curriculum Committee will come to the meeting with the outcomes from the previous assessment modules, evidence of student work, and teacher feedback. This information will assist in making any needed adjustments to future modules. Create Social Studies and Science modules for January-February addressing amended essential elements in both instructional pacing calendar and assessment rubrics. Each representing a linkage between age appropriate content and leveled achievement standards. Each representative from the Curriculum Committee will come to the meeting with the outcomes from the previous assessment modules, evidence of student work, and teacher feedback. This Alternately assessed students February 2019 Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers 2018-19 CEP 28 information will assist in making any needed adjustments to future modules. Create Social Studies and Science modules for March-April with amended essential elements incorporated. addressing amended essential elements in both instructional pacing calendar and assessment rubrics. Each representing a linkage between age appropriate content and leveled achievement standards. Each representative from the Curriculum Committee will come to the meeting with the outcomes from the previous assessment modules, evidence of student work, and teacher feedback. This information will assist in making any needed adjustments to future modules. Alternately assessed students April 2019 Curriculum Committee / 2 administrators, 9 teachers Create Social Studies and Science modules for May-June 2018 with amended essential elements incorporated.addressing amended essential elements in both instructional pacing calendar and assessment rubrics. Each representing a linkage between age appropriate content and leveled achievement standards. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive progress reports with more detailed accounts of student learning in relation to content areas. Parent workshops will be offered to aide parents in understanding the use of the Essential Elements of the NGLS. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teacher monies will be put aside specifically for teacher coverges to allow all members of the curriculum to participate in monthly meetings during the school days. In having representatives from all 8 sites, it is challenging to have after school meetings. Teacher and supervisor per session funds will be allocated to allow for a Saturday Curriculum Institute in March-April. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Committee will have created the updated Essential Elements documents and (2) Social Studies and (2) Science modules with the Essential Elements of the Next Generation Learning Standards adapted into instructional pacing calendar and assessment rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The completed Pacing Calendars and Assessment rubrics for Module I and Module 11 will be used to assess appropriate progress in meeting this goal. Mid-Year Progress: We may have been a little ambitious with this goal, as the information is systematically being released by the New York State Education Department. We are aware of the importance of having a full understanding of the changes and improvements of the new set of learning standards. To date, we are on par with the State’s Phase I of the “implementation time line” for the Next Generation Learning Standards NGLS), which is to raise awareness. The curriculum committee and school administrators have completed the survey distributed by New York City’s Central office, designed to gather information regarding schools’ readiness for the next phase of implementation. The curriculum team, along with administrators, has begun to explore the resources distributed by the State Education Department, specifically, the NGLS road maps as well as the “cross walks” available in the Professional Development Tool kits. In late March, early April, two members of our curriculum team will be attending a three part professional development on the implementation of the next phase. The team will meet in late April to turnkey their learnings and to begin to create their own document of the Essential Elements of the NGLS, identifying priorities. In addition, utilizing both City and State resources the team will create an “in depth” presentation for the June Professional Conference Day. Following that, the Curriculum Committee will meet for their Summer Institute to begin embedding the NGLS throughout the curriculum. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's Data Inquiry team is composed of a group of administrators and teachers, with at least one representative from each site, who will meet to analyze student data to identify student strengths, weaknesses, and trends, which administration uses to make organizational decisions. In analyzing the SANDI-FAST results for the 2017-2018 school year, it became evident that there is a 2% achievement gap between ELL students and their English speaking peers. Addressing this area of closing the achievement gap for student identified as English language Learners, correlates with the element of Effective School Leadership of the NYC Framework for Great Schools. In addition, it addresses the NYS ESSA goal of "reducing persistent achievement gaps through equitable allocation of resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 12:1:1 E.L.L. alternate assessment high school students, will demonstrate increased proficiency in literacy skills, specifically in the area of Reading for Information, as evidenced by a three percentage point increase in the overall average of this subgroup scoring at Levels 1, 2, or 3, as measured by the SANDI spring 2019 summative assessment tool in the Reading for Information Standards Reports. Data will be analyzed by the Data Inquiry Team and site based Inquiry teams. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENL teachers will attend District training in SANDI-FAST Assessment ENL Teachers September 2018 Administrators Site Based Inquiry teams will select ELL students as their students of Inquiry Focus ELL Students October 2018-May 2019 Classroom teachers Instructional Support Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech Teachers School Based Coach and Administrators ENL teachers will participate in the inquiry process at assigned sites ENL teachers October 2018-May 2019 Data Inquiry Team Members and Administrators Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and administrators will meet weekly to plan collaborative lessons Alternate assessment ELL students October 2018-May 2019 School purchased a Foundational Reading Program for struggling readers , System 44 Professional Development will be provided to all teachers, paraprofessionals, and ENL teachers. All 12:1:1 alternate assessment students October 2018-May 2019 Classroom teachers Instructional Support Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech Teachers School Based Coach and Administrators Classroom Teachers Instructional Support Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech Teachers, School Based Coach and Administrators 2018-19 CEP 32  Baseline SANDI assessment will be administered Site based teams will meet to review data and identify areas of need for ELL students FAST Benchmarks assessment will be administered Site based teams will meet monthly to review data and monitor progress. ENL teachers will identify specific strategies to support students Administrators will conduct learning walks and both formal and informal observations, specific to collaborative lessons All alternate assessment students October 2018 Alternate assessment ELL students October 2018 All alternate assessment students February 2019 Alternate assessment ELL students February 2019 classroom teachers and ENL teachers Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers Instructional Support Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech Teachers, School Based Coach and Administrators Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers Instructional Support Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech Teachers, School Based Coach and Administrators Administrators October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 Final SANDI assessment will be administered All alternate assessment students May 2019 Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 33 Data Inquiry Team will meet early February and then again in May to analyze the standards reports in the area of Reading for Information. All alternate assessment students October 2018 and May 2019 Data Inquiry Team Members and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ENL and classroom teachers will send home weekly communication logs beginning October 2018 through June 2019. ENL teachers will include comments on the Report Cards, with a focus on reading goals. The assessment team will provide a workshop for parents on the SANDI/FAST assessment and how we use the tool to drive instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1.Instructional funds from the fiscal year 2018-2019 will be used to support professional development and purchase classroom materials, to include visual dictionaries. 2. Instructional funds will be used to pay for coverage when staff members participate in professional development. 3. Instructional funds will be used to provide coverage for staff members who engage in inter-visitation opportunities. 4. Instructional funds will be used for substitute teachers to allow the Data Inquiry Team to meet during the school day to review and analyze current data in order to allow them to appropriately adjustment to the reporting of progress tool. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 12:1:1 E.L.L. alternate assessment high school students, will demonstrate increased proficiency in literacy skills, specifically in the area of Reading for Information, as evidenced by a 1.5 percentage point increase in the overall average of this subgroup scoring at Levels 1, 2, or 3, as measured by the FAST I Benchmark summative assessment tool in the Reading for Information Standards Reports. Data will be analyzed by the Data Inquiry Team and site based Inquiry teams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 34  SANDI/FAST: Reading for information standard reports Mid-Year Progress: For our Effective School Leadership goal, final analysis will be done following the spring administration of the SANDI assessment; however, we have been implementing the specific activities and strategies outlined in our Action Plan. Due to the fact that our targeted group for this goal are our students who are English Language Learners, we believed it was imperative to have our ENL teachers fully engaged in both the assessment and instructional processes. To date, our ENL teachers have participated in the District SANDI-FAST training as well as the professional development series on the implementation of our new foundational reading program for struggling readers. Our ENL teachers have been meeting regularly with teachers to plan and evaluate lessons, adding specific strategies to address the unique concerns for ELL students. Similar to the principles of Universal Design for Learning, many of the strategies the ENL teachers bring to the table are able to impact all of the students. In addition, our site-based Inquiry teams have selected ELL students as their students of focus. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P233Q uses a collaborative approach to decision making, to include a variety of stakeholders, the Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Support Teachers, teachers, para professionals, Related Service Providers, Parent Coordinator, Transition Coordinator, the School Leadership Team and the School Based Coach. The Annual Staff Needs Assessment Survey and the School Comprehensive Education Plan are used to determine specific areas of strength as well as priority needs as a way to promote strong family-community ties. This approach addresses the element of Strong Family and Communities ties, as well as the NYS ESSA goals of supporting efforts to improve school environments. Lastly, from the Blueprint for Improved Results for Students with Disabilities, we are incorporating the guiding principle "Parents and other family members are engaged as meaningful partners in the special education process". As per a review of the school data for the 2017-2018 school year, with respect to parent involvement, it was determined that there is a continued need to increase opportunities and efforts to expand family involvement. It should also be noted that with respect to the Six Areas of the Framework for Great Schools, according to the 17-18 school survey, P233 scored the lowest in the area of "strong family and community ties". 2017-2018 Outcomes, across all sites, were as follows: Over all parent participation: 21% Parent-Teacher Conferences: 40% participation Workshops: 5% participation Special Events: 18.5% participation Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P233Q will increase parental active engagement and communication with the school body as measured by a 2% overall increase in parental attendance in available parent workshops, teacher parent meetings, student centered events and assemblies and/or family functions. Administrators, the Parent coordinator, IST's will regularly monitor parent outreach and attendance to ensure that information is disseminated to all 8 sites in a timely manner. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Expand P233Q's transition support training at parent-teacher conferences at our middle school sites. Advertise and have available language translators. Middle schools Oct 2018-May 2019 Maintain a "parent resource" board at each site with relevant, timely resources, to include signage with translations for high frequency languages. All P233Q sites Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, IST's, Transition coordinator, parent coordinator, guidance counselors Administration, IST's, school aides, parent coordinator , guidance counselors Administration, parent coordinator, IST's, guidance counselors Administration, parent coordinator, IST's, guidance counselors Administration, IST's, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, related service providers Administration, IST's, parent coordinator, guidance counselors Administration, IST's, parent coordinator, guidance counselors November 2018 Sept 2018 May 2019 Sept 2018 May 2019 Sept 2018 May 2019 Create and distribute an "interest survey" to be sent home to families of students at all sites. Surveys will be translated for all high frequency languages at each site. Questions will be included regarding preferred meeting locations and times. Results from family survey will be reviewed and charted . All P233Q sites All P233Q sites Sept 2018 Advertise/promote site specific workshop to families from all sites. Provide a diverse menu of workshops to address the needs of students from all age groups and class ratios, to include OT's, PT's ELL teachers, and Speech teachers. All P233Q sites Include all workshops and special events on monthly 233 Calendar. All P233Q Sites Parent Coordinator will be provided with a tracking document created by the DIT to capture attendance at all special events, meetings, and trainings. All P233Q Sites 2018-19 CEP 37  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Leverage resources to create/purchase materials for flyers, newsletters, and site based parent resource boards, and calendars. 2. Utilize para professionals, ENL teachers and parent coordinators at all site parent-teacher conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, as a mid-point bench mark, there will be a 1% increase in parental engagement. The Data Inquiry team, and Administration will review and analyze monthly specific activity attendance sheets, phone logs and outreach logs for all site based and school wide events and activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, phone logs, out reach logs, as well as overall tracking log for the parent coordinator. Mid-Year Progress: To date, we have achieved our expectations for this annual goal, which is to increase overall parental engagement and participation by 2% from the previous school year. Our Data Inquiry Team analyzed the data collected by the IST’s and the Parent Coordinator. We compared attendance from the 2017-2018 school year, to this school year, to date. We looked at three areas, the Fall Meet and Greets, the fall parent teacher conferences, and Family events and Workshops open to all families. Although we saw a slight decline in attendance at our Meet and Greets and Parent Teacher conferences, we saw a significant up-tick in the number of families participating in Family Events and Workshops. The numbers moved from 17% participation last year to 32% participation so far this year. We attribute this increase to 2 factors. First, having a new elementary school last year, more parents participated in the Parent teacher conferences and meet and greets, whereas this school year, overall, more families are attending more school wide events. In addition, in October, we conducted a parent interest survey, in which we asked parents what areas they would like to receive trainings. Two of the top areas of interest were behavior management and communication. This information has been taken into consideration when planning parent workshops. Our OT’s, Speech providers and Behavior Specialists have each hosted workshops at various locations. We ensure that all families are invited. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Levels attained as per SANDI Reports. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  Program/STEM (6:1:1 and 12:1:4 (MS and HS )  Program/Rigor Reading CCLS Rubrics (12:1:1 HS) Pre and Post unit assessments Student Portfolios  Program: Systems 44  (struggling 12:1:1 students) First Author (struggling/reluctant writers 12:1:1, 8: Diagnostic Tools  Program/Edmark 6:1:1 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one and Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Each service/program is provided/used during the school day. MS/HS)      Program ELSB (Elementary) Strategy/Thinking Maps Strategy/Books on Tape Strategy/Andrew Heiskell Talking Books on Tape Strategy/High Interest/Low Level Readers Strategy/Use of ELL strategies Strategy/Use of Technology (Smartboard, computer, IPad,laptops) Strategy/Use of UDL Strategy/Tutoring Strategy/Use of Graphic Organizers Strategy and Resource /Use of Reading Websites Strategy/Use of Vizzle        2018-19 CEP 39  Mathematics Levels attained as per SANDI Reports. CCLS Rubrics Portfolios Science Project Rubrics Portfolios Projects Science/STEM Fair Social Studies Project Rubrics Portfolios P.233Q Best Practice Fair Program/Attainment Budget Math (12:1:1) Strategy Use of CCLS Math Standards of Practice Strategy and Resource/Use of Math Websites Strategy/Tutoring Strategy/Teacher Collaboration/Inquiry Teams Program/Use of Rigor Topics (12:1:1) Strategy/Use of Brain Pop Strategy/National Geographic Kids Strategy and Resource/Use of Science Websites Strategy/Project Based Learning Activities Strategy/Vizzle Activities Program/Use of Rigor Topics (12:1:1) Strategy/Use of Brain Pop Strategy/Use of History Channel    Strategy/Writing activities (i.e. Journal, Newletters, etc) Strategy/Parent Notification Progress reports Strategy/Teacher Collaboration /Inquiry Meetings Program/Touch Math (6:1:1 MS) One to One Program/Equals (12:1:4 and 6:1:1 HS) Small group Each service/program is provided/used during the school day. One to one Small group Provided by way of P.233Q curriculum activities One to one Small group Provided by way of P.233Q curriculum activities 2018-19 CEP 40  District SS Fair Strategy and Resources /Use of Social Studies Websites At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs GRTL Power of Choice FBA /BIP Points Book OPT incident Anecdotal Reports Strategy/Project Based Learning Activities Program/Behavior Management Plans (as per IEPs) One to one Small group Program/Power of Choice Behavior Management Program (used in 12:1:1 and 6:1:1 HS) Each service /program is provided/used during the school day. Program/Get Ready to Learn Strategy/Train staff to use Therapeutic Crisis Intervention /TCI Strategy/Participation in Specialty Clubs Strategy/Parent Training Strategy/Invite parent to IEP meetings Strategy/Collect Behavioral data for students with crisis paraprofessionals and students demonstrating interfering behaviors Strategy/Parent Involvement /Parent notification Strategy/Student/Parent Contracts Strategy/Informative meetings with bus personnel concerning unsafe or distracting behaviors Strategy/Use of Behavior Management/Teacher/Guidance Counselor as needed Strategy/Conflict Resolution Sessions 2018-19 CEP 41  Strategy/Teacher Collaboration/Common Planning Meetings 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. P.233Q is a not a Title 1 School P.233Q is not a Title 1 School Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). P.233Q currently has six students (1.34%) who are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 43  Although P.233Q does not receive a Title I allocation, we will continue to provide students with rigorous instruction in a goal oriented supportive environment which fosters trust and student accountability. Thematic lessons will be designed to afford students with multiple opportunities by way of project based learning, differentiated instruction, hands-on activities and the use of Technology. In addition, P233 has policies and procedures in place to monitor the attendance of all students. The school aide at each site engages in daily telephone outreach for all students not in attendance. They then communicate with the members of the attendance committee, which meets weekly, and includes (2) guidance counselors, the pupil accounting secretary, the data specialists, the attendance teacher, and an administrator. The attendance teacher has established communication with the school based liaison at each of the residences of our (6) students STH. We will ensure that all involved parties are familiar with the OYD STH Consolidated Plan. Lastly, teachers communicate daily with parents via a communication notebook and telephone calls. With respect to any specific needs that might arise, such as eye glasses, back packs, uniforms, or any other school related materials. Teachers communicate needs with administrators, the parent coordinator, the guidance counselors, and the transition coordinator and we work as a team to meet those needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. P.233Q did not receive a Title 1 allocation. 2018-19 CEP 44  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 45  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 46  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.233Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.233Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; schools parent involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: (1 ) Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference (2) Hosting educational family events / activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the 2017-2018 school year (3) Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events (4) Establishing a Parent Resource Center / Area or lending library (5) Providing home language instructional and informative materials to parents (6) Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers (7) Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress (8) Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities, units of study and/or student progress (9) Providing school planners / folders to promote ongoing written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand (10) Inviting parents to assemblies School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P233Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 50  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 52  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 12 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P233Q is a Special Ed school in District 75 School that serves students from K-12 with autism, intellectual disabilities, multiple disabilities, learning disabilities, emotional/behavioral difficulties, inclusion and/or severe language and communication disorders. There are 522 students registered at P233, of which 120 are ELLs. Our ELL population stretches across our 8 sites throughout the borough of Queens. These sites consist of three are high school sites, three middle school sites, and two elementary school sites.The P233Q School has a freestanding English as a New Language Program (ENL), consisting of integrated and standalone ENL services. Students to staff ratios are 12:1:1, 12;1;4, 8:1:1 and 6:1:1. The integrated model is used to assist students across curricular areas, and allows them to remain in the classroom with their English-speaking peers.Additionally, it provides the opportunity for classroom and ENL teachers to collaborate in planning, instruction, and setting high academic achievement standards in the target language. Thus, the English Language Learners are given the opportunity to acquire the English language across all subject areas. In doing so, the ENL teacher provides content area instruction using ENL methodologies.Students whose IEP recommends bilingual services, receive support in their native language from an alternate placement paraprofessional in accordance with CR Part 154 mandates while they receive ENL from a licensed ENL teacher. Instruction is driven by the (CCLS) Common Core Learning Standards and Alternate Grade Level Indicators (AGLIs) for students in alternate assessment. The NYSESLAT is administered every year to all ELL students regardless of their disability. Instruction is delivered via one or more of the following ENL methodologies: TPR (Total Physical Response), Language Experience Approach, and CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach).The P233 Title III Saturday ENL Program for 2018-2019 school year will continue to be a Saturday program with a focus on cooking. The program will run for 8 Saturdays, during February-April 2019. This program will run from 9:00 AM to 1:00PM. Instruction will be delivered in English using ENL methodologies. In the past few years, our Title III Saturday program had a theme of “Cooking Around the World,” in which students research recipes from different countries to cook during the program. The theme was highly successful, as both the students and parents who participated in the program provided positive feedback on exploring cuisine from around the globe. With that in mind, we will continue with the theme of international cuisine, but will change our focus to one specific meal: brunch. The Title III direct supplemental Instructional support will be provided to (12) ELL alternate assessment students with a 12:1:4 class student to staff IEP ratio in grades 7-12. Data collected and analyzed indicated that due to similar student needs and abilities, additional support should improve their academic achievement and English Language Acquisition. Instruction will be provided in English by one certified ENL teacher, with additional support of 6 Bilingual 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information paraprofessionals (4 Classroom, 2 1:1 paraprofessionals, and one Technology Paraprofessional.) The program will be supervised by a P233 administrator. The program will be held in the English Language, as provided by one certified ENL teacher. Our six bilingual paraprofessionals, whose native languages Spanish, Urdu, Bengali, Punjabi, and French, will support both parents and students participating in the program. Our the technology paraprofessional will support all technological aspects of the program, which will include an end of the program IMovie, which will detail all of the highlights of our program, which will be viewed during our final day “brunch” celebration. Our goal will be to build ELLs’ listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English using ENL methodologies. A Learning Through an Extended Arts Program (LEAP) artist in co-operation with the ENL teacher will provide 8 lessons on cooking, each day being a different brunch cuisine native to a specific country (students will research and vote on which countries brunch cuisine they will make during the first session.) An article detailing different “brunch” foods from around the world will be adapted by the ENL teacher to reference with the students when deciding on which food to make throughout the program (https://www.delish.com/food/g4070/brunch-around-the-world.) The LEAP artist, who will supply the ingredients, will lead the cooking lesson, and work with the students on kitchen cleanup during these instructional sessions. The LEAP artist will work in conjunction with the ENL teacher to provide instructions on the visual elements of preparing brunch food from around the world as well as their cultural and historical significance. Our Title III Saturday Instructional Program is created in accordance with the New Language Arts Progressions and Common Core Learning Standards. Our program will provide students with the opportunity to engage in hands on learning activities related to foods from different cultures. The ENL curriculum provides interdisciplinary applied learning opportunities in math, science, social studies, and language arts. Students learn appropriate ways to use their five senses to become aware of the environmental aspects of food and how food choices are unique in different countries and can impact your health and the health of the environment.As part of our program, students will have a better understanding of the differences between cultures in regards to food made for brunch around the world. They will examine the differences between cultures in regards to food made and consumed during the specific meal of brunch. Parents will be involved in this process sharing their own traditional cooking recipes from their cultures for brunch, which will be discussed during the first session of the program. Once recipes are chosen, students will follow a recipe, written in English. Students will use math skills to measure and count ingredients. Once the dishes are prepared, students will set the tables and invite the parents to have a sit-down brunch native to the country chosen for that week. The program will be held in the English Language, as provided by LEAP and one certified ENL teacher. The Title lll program will be assessed through teacher-created rubrics and teacher observation.Technology will be integrated into instruction during the Saturday instructional program at 233Q. Research has also shown that technology can be used to enhance teaching and learning in schools (Fisher, Dwyer, and Yocam, 1996; Cummins and Sayers, 1997). Researchers report that technology motivates students, encourages them to take ownership of their own work, builds metacognitive skills, provides students with access to other cultures, and enhances classrooms as centers of inquiry, exploration and literacy (Toppings, K., 1998). Our expert technology paraprofessional will use laptops, Ipads, Smart boards, and digital cameras to help students and parents research recipes and foods for the meal of “brunch” from different countries around the world. The paraprofessional will also support the program by taking pictures and videos of the program to make an IMovie of highlights from this year’s program. Further benefits of our technology uses, are enhancement of creativity; encouraging student independence; building ELLs decision making skills; and celebrating cultural uniqueness.Transportation cards will be provided. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Saturday Professional Development will be on-going and the dates will coincide with the dates students attend. Professional Development will take place from 8:00 am- 9:00 am, during the first 5 Saturdays of the program. It is important that the staff participate in Professional development as "Professional development and other organized in-service programs are designed to foster the growth of teachers that can be used for their further development (Crowther et al, 2000)Those participating in the Professional development will be the Assistant principal, ENL teacher and 7 paraprofessionals. The ENL teacher will present the following workshops, the list of topics is as follows: - Incorporating ENL Methodologies -The Teaching of ENL through the content areas of Math, Science, and Social Studies- The Use of Technology - i.e. - Smart boards and IPADS in ENL Education with a Focus on Cooking-Incorporating the Language Experience Approach into cooking instructions for ELLs- Designing Assessments in ADL classrooms for ELLs- Engaging students using grade appropriate language to ask questions Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement is a combination of commitment and active participation on the part of the parent to the school and to the student. New technologies have made communication between home and school more efficient and improved. For teachers, online communication makes it easier to reach parents and build a partnership with parents. It also allows parents to receive information about their child's performance and activities at school and the opportunity to ask questions and provide information as needed. When parents and teachers communicate, they are able to support students' learning together more effectively. As a team they can work together for the well being of the student. There are number of ways that technology can help to connect parent to the classroom experience. Children are shown to have a much better chance at success if their parents are actively engaged and reinforces the learning that is happening in the school. Our Title III program during the 2017-2018 school year invited parents to actively participate in the cooking program with their children. The parents provided overwhelmingly positive feedback on the experience, as they felt that the program helped them: enhance their English language and literacy skills, improve their ability to communicate in English with staff and 2018-19 CEP 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities students in the program, and improved their ability to cook various cuisines from different countries. The LEAP artist and the P233 ENL teacher will use cooking, computers, and technology, support adult literacy skills for ELL/Bilingual parents participating in the regular program with the students. These activities will make parents feel more comfortable and confident when they read, write, and speak English, as they will actively participate in the program with their children, and will be exposed to program materials in English. Parents will be presented hands on activities with their children that will help to foster and develop stronger receptive and expressive language skills in order to support their children in school and in the community. Our staff will support them as they use technology to support the students’ efforts to research cooking recipes and ingredients for the program. They will also work with our technology paraprofessional (mostly during the kitchen cleanup activities) to help create an Imovie that will highlight the key moments of the program, which will be viewed by the students and parents during the last session. Letters will be sent home in parents’ native language that will be informing them of the Title III program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Direct Instruction:$12,124.42 Professional Development: $1836.05 Purchased services $3000.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 Teacher X 8 Saturdays X 4 hours per Saturday @ 60.65 per hour =$1940.80 1 Supervisor X 8 Saturdays X 4 hours per Saturday @ $63.45 per hour = $2030.40 7 Paraprofessionals X 4 hours X 8 Saturdays @ $34.73 per hour = $7779.521 Secretary (to handle payroll and purchases) 10 hours X $37.37 = $373.70 Professional Development 1 Teacher Instructor of PD X 5 Saturdays X 1 hours per Saturday @ $60.65 per hour = $303.25 1 Supervisor X 5 Saturdays X 1 hours per Saturday @ $63.45 per hour = $317.25 7 Paraprofessionals X 5 Saturdays X 1 hours per Saturday @ $34.73 = $1215.55 LEAP - Learning Through an Extended Arts Program 2018-19 CEP 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. For students: Eight co-instructional, workshops (Cooking Around the World) provided by LEAP ( $375X 8= $3000) Cooking Supplies- Paper plates, napkins, paper towels, plastic spoons,knives, forks METRO CARDS = 100 cards X $5.00= $500.00 Refreshments for parents attending Saturday workshops = $250.00  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $287.53 $500.00 $250.00 $17,998 2018-19 CEP 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P233Q Borough Queens School Number 233 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mrs. Debbie Edmonds Coach Ms. Sheree Friedman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Farida Jhaveri Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Shan Gu-ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Pam Gaynor-Trans. Coor. Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Mr. Michael DiGiovanni Coach type here School Counselor Mr.John Hamilton Parent Ms. Belinda Velez Parent Coordinator Ms. Laura Castano Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 466 Total number of ELLs 104 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.32% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P233Q is a D75 special education school that serves students with disabilities in grades K-12; disabilities include but are not limited to: autism, intellectual disabilities, multiple disabilities, learning disabilities, speech and language impairment. There are 466 students registered, of which 104 are ELLs. These students are located at one of eight sites in Queens. P233Q consists of three high school sites, three middle school sites, and two elementary sites. During the year 2016-2017, all P233Q students in alternate assessment are assessed via the Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST). To further support learning, P233Q students are also assessed through Attainment Math (12:1:1), EQUALS (12:1:4 and 6:1:1),ELSB, and ERSB. Also, P233Q students are assessed by way of weekly IEP data, observed lessons, 2018-19 CEP 62  culminating (practical) projects, and other teacher created individualized formative assessments, that are embedded in the P233 Q curriculum. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teachers design their academic instruction through the analysis of data based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Data results show that students need extensive support in reading and writing modalities, whereas Speaking and Listening modalities have proven to be their greater strength. Presently, one of our ELL students is involved in Standardized Assessment. The school's Data Inquiry Team routinely uses data to further isolate areas of need in both math and ELA for ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The majority of our students are assessed through the summative assessments of NYSAA (New York State Alternate Assessment) and via the SANDI (Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory.) 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Through Data analysis, it is determined that ELL students performed equally well as their monolingual peers on the NYSAA as reflected by the data in all content areas including ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. The IEP drives all instructional decisions at P233Q, the classroom and ENL teachers create instructional activities and differentiate lessons to address IEP goals. P233Q continuously evaluates the progress and success of ELL students by way of formative and summative assessments as well as NYSESLAT. Teachers participate in collaborative planning to target and plan for the learning needs of ELL students. Our ENL teachers have reviewed both the 2016 NYSESLAT and NYSAA scores (for our ELL students) which they have used to plan for meaningful data driven instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework, ENL teachers derive the data from SANDI and SANDI/FAST. SANDI data results show a learning deficit in the areas of vocabulary and decoding skills for ELL students. To build a stronger vocabulary base for each ELL student, the ENL teachers conduct short lessons and discussions around vocabulary given contextual clues. Within the RTI framework, teachers write language objectives that are clear and measurable for ELL students. ENL teachers adapt content and use vocabulary mindful of the student's proficiency level. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns from the results of the 2017 students' NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results reveal that a majority of our students are at the Entering level. These ELLs are limited in terms of their receptive and expressive language. The vast majority of ELLs do not read or write at a functional level. Therefore, specific instructional activities using selected ENL methodologies are used to further increase receptive and expressive language skills. Various ELA Programs are used across grades and ratios at P233Q: ELSB (English Language Skills Builders)elementary, RIGOR(High School), and STEM(Middle and High school) reading programs. To advance skill building in ELA, tasks are broken down into manageable steps and lessons are scaffolded. The ENL teacher works interdependently with the classroom teacher/s using the collaborative approach for both planning and instruction. Additionally, instruction is differentiated based on the needs of the ELL students. If a student is mandated to receive speech services, the classroom teachers are provided with the added support of the speech teacher in order to ensure that the ELL's communication and language needs are met. Rubrics are used as a way to measure student progress and identify whether or not an ELL student understands a concept thus allowing the teacher to further adapt and/or differentiate instruction. Teacher observations, student progress reports, selected resources, collected data, teacher made materials and informal tests all assist to evaluate the effectiveness of the ENL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 63  The school utilizes the school's data inquiry team to analyze student data, which includes a focus on ELL student performance. The team breaks down the students' data to analyze the performance level(s) of these students, which in turn is shared with both classroom teachers, and our ENL teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELL students will receive a specified amount of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL minutes based on their English Proficiency Level (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding) derived from the NYSESLAT scores. At present, all ELL students will be grouped in three contiguous grades. Administration has made an effort to group our ELL students together in self-contained classes based on disability classifications and the age of these students. Standalone ENL instruction will be delivered by a certified ENL teacher, who will provide instructions to the students out of classroom. This instruction will develop English Language skills, so that the students can succeed in core content courses. The ENL teachers will plan with special education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction.Integrated ENL instruction will be delivered collaboratively by an ENL teacher and classroom special education teacher. This instruction will include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers for lesson planning, to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. b. TBE program. If applicable. P233 does not have a TBE Program. c. DL program. If applicable. P233 does not have a Dual Language Program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL instruction will be delivered based on the New CR-Part 154 chart below: ENL Minutes: Grades K to 8 CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language: Beginner/Entering 360 Total # minutes, of which 180 mts. stand alone and180 mts. integrated ENL/ELA Low Intermediate/Emerging 360 Total# of minutes, of which 90 mts. stand alone,180 mts. integrated ENL/ELA, and90 mts content areaIntermediate/Transitioning 180 Total# of minutes, of which 90 mts. integrated ENL/ELA 90 mts in other content areaAdvanced/Expanding 180 Total# of minutes, of which 180 mts integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Proficient/Commanding 90 Total# of minutes, of which 90mts. in other content area ENL Minutes: Grades 9 to 12 CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language: Beginner/Entering 540 Total# of minutes, of which 180 mts. stand alone, 180 integrated ENL/ELA and180 any content areaLow Intermediate/Emerging 360 Total# of minutes of which 90 mts. stand alone,180mts integrated ENL/ELA and 90 any content area Intermediate/Transitioning 180 Total# of minutes of which 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 any content area Advanced/Expanding 180 Total# of minutes ,180 mts integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Proficient/Commanding 90 Total# of minutes , 90mts integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Administration grouped our ELL students at each site into classes to help our teachers meet the required minutes outlined in CR Part 154.2. Our ENL teachers have strategically formulated their schedules to maximize their time to meet these mandates of both Standalone and Integrated ENL. 2018-19 CEP 64  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The school's philosophy and practice is to support ELLs and improve upon each ELLs individual success given their current level of language skills and overall ability to integrate into their community. As stated, P233q only offers ENL, and we do not have a TBE or a DL program at this time. Content is delivered in our ENL program through a combination of Standalone and Integrated ENL by our two certified ENL teachers. For Integrated ENL, our teachers meet with the content area co-teachers to strategically plan their lessons to meet the needs of the ELL students in the classroom. For our ELL students who are designated as bilingual, we provide an alternate placement paraprofessional to assist with language acquisition and access to the content material. These paraprofessionals provide support for these students by communicating via their home language. Some common instructional strategies used by the ENL teachers are: Scaffolding, Modeling, Bridging, Text representation, etc. Based on a student's level/grade, and learning need, the ENL teachers support teachers in their ability to provide students with access to all aspects of instruction. To promote literacy skills, students use published or adapted books (both commercial and teacher made.). ENL teachers align language and vocabulary to the student's assessed reading level. All methods used by our teachers are aligned with P233Q's curriculum, which is aligned with CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our bilingual ELLs are supported by an alternate placement paraprofessional, with the service of Freestanding ENL services. These paraprofessionals provide access to the content in the student’s home language, which allows the pedagogue to accurately assess the student across all educational environments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To meet the needs of SIFE students, the ENL teachers provide support by reinforcing class routines. The specific use of strategies to include but not limited to the use of pictures and other visual materials will be used to have students use language across domains and settings. Emphasis will be placed on an ELL student's ability to acquire and use contextual words, gestures, and intonations that are appropriate both in and out of the school setting. The special education classroom teachers will assess all new ELL students using the SANDI benchmark assessment tool. The results of this assessment are used as the baseline in order to make informed instructional decisions. Every effort will be made to help a student understand what they need to know when they enter our school. Understood expectations can include: the importance of maintaining a daily routine, obeying classroom and school rules, how to access transportation, how to be a successful learner in the classroom. [If needed, the student will be provided with a bilingual paraprofessional as support.] All collected summative and formative data will be used to drive instruction and track a student's progress. The ENL teachers will then be responsible for teaching academic language and English language development and proficiency to each ELL students as follows: - help a student acquire beginning (entry level) skills - provide instruction in core content area - provide basic literacy development opportunities - monitor and assess collected data. Since a majority of P233Q's ELL students are non-verbal, ENL teachers, classroom teachers and related service providers use strategies and modes of communication to facilitate the use of language and language development using a student's preferred mode of communication. Technology [Smartboard, Ipad, and computer] are used by all students. When applicable, Picture Exchange Symbols, (PECS), picture cues, object cues, picture symbols, and voice output devices, [DYNAVOX, jelly bean switch, etc.] are used so as to help non-verbal and/or limited verbal students initiate and maintain effective communication with peers, school staff, and their families. Opportunities to promote communication are encouraged by way of school social events and community based instruction. For the Developing ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years the plan is as follows: - Plan lessons to teach to established areas of need [scaffold instruction and adapt and/or differentiate lessons accordingly]. - Place an emphasis on the development of discrete language skills and academic language skills. The goal for Long Term ELLs receiving services for 7 or more years, the plan is as follows: The ENL teachers will help develop and improve upon language skills by doing the following: - 2018-19 CEP 65  conduct dictation exercises - use oral sentence completion activities - use written cloze passages - use summarization and retelling exercises [for reading activities ] - provide writing opportunities [and provide comprehensive teacher feedback] - utilize a newspaper to read, review and discuss current events. Students who appear as Long Term ELLs (LTE), who have not reached the proficient/commanding level of English Language Acquisition, as per the NYSESLAT, after 7 years of ELL services, are considered Long Term ELLs (LTE). Due to the nature of their disabilities and/or continued need for support, ELL students will continue to use established strategies and adaptive curriculum to meet their language and learning needs. Assessments will be used to monitor student progress. The older (HS) LTE students are provided with additional learning opportunities by way of “Practical” vocational experiences offered both in-school and at community based work sites. The inclusive intent of providing students with vocational learning experiences is to better prepare students for post-secondary (over 21) placement and overall community integration. For Long Term ELLs, instruction will be geared toward community integration and successful integration in the work place. The instructional focus will be on socialization skills, essential job skills, and improving in the four modalities of English literacy. Given staff support, the Long Term ELLs are assigned to work at some of the following off-site venues: - QCP --- doing packaging and assembly line tasks (hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills) - Goodwill --- sorting clothing (hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills) - Food pantry --- sorting and packing food and counting (math skills, socialization skills) - Staples --- stacking, sorting and cleaning (hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills) - Carter Burden --- food service (culinary skills, socialization skills, hands-on vocational skills) - Covello --- food service (culinary skills, socialization skills, hands-on vocational skills) - Forest view Nursing Home --- recreational aide and food service (culinary skills, socialization skills) - Recycling --- Stop and Shop (math skills, hands-on vocational skills) In addition, Long Term ELLs are provided with opportunities to learn life skills given different vocational on-site experiences to include: - Print shop --- copier, shredding laminating and binding books. - Metro Café --- running a snack shop (culinary skills, hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills) - Mail delivery--- delivering mail from site to site using OPT buses (socialization skills, reading skills) - Card Shop --- creating and printing greeting cards (hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills, reading skills) - CTEA Pasta Store --- running a snack shop (culinary skills, hands-on vocational skills, socialization skills) 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In the P233Q curriculum, ELA is infused into all subject areas. ENL teachers, along with their classroom colleagues, scaffold and differentiated instruction in order to help provide access the CCLS for ELL students. To facilitate understanding, some students are provided with concrete objects/items that they can touch, hear, and/or smell when exploring their world. Our teachers use of variety of objects, pictures, Smartboard activities, and teacher created worksheets (that are age appropriate for the students' grade level) to provide access to the content foe our ELL students. In addition, peer-to-peer learning opportunities are provided so that ELL students can be successfully involved and fully partake in debates, class projects, unit assemblies, etc.). Although ELL students typically master selected IEP goals (as per the SANDI assessment), P233Q ELL students have yet to attain English proficiency within the least restricted environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school works closely with our ENL teachers so that their schedules so that our students can work with the ENL teachers during instructional periods. When scheduling does not allow for this process, our ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers and related service providers to target specific IEP goals during standalone sessions. Administration has worked to group our ELL SWDs in the same classes to allow for our ENL teachers to push in to classes for the students' mandated ENL minutes. Weekly data, teacher made assessments, practical unit projects, student performance tasks, and scheduled progress reports are used to monitor each student's overall progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers use different strategies to address the learning needs of ELL students. To foster participation and the comprehension of concepts, teachers integrate technology using websites, educational software, Smartboard activities, and the VIZZLE program. In addition, students use technology to further improve their reading and writing skills (i.e. write letters, send emails, 2018-19 CEP 66  etc.). By using technology, lessons become more interactive as well as increase the student's overall motivation to learn. Project based learning and access to technology serve to address different learning styles when delivering instruction. Each classroom has a language rich environment. Technology, multi-sensory and interactive lessons provide ELLs with the ability to strengthen their vocabulary and further improve their English language skills. For ELLs in 12:1:1, 12:1:4, 8:1:1 and 6:1:1 programs, the following intervention programs are being utilized: - ELA [RIGOR, STEM, Smile, First Author] - MATH [Equals Math, Attainment] - SOCIAL STUDIES - P233Q adapted curriculum [Emphasizes the importance of being responsible citizen in school and in the community. Emphasis is on social skills and following established rules. Students participate in events including elections, debates and publishing the school newspaper. - Science [Inquiry learning, use of the CCLS math Standards of practice, and technology applied to concepts across branches of Science] For all students including ELLs, UDL (Universal Design for Learning) principles and the need to learn functional skills in the areas of reading, writing and math is emphasized. Currently, the 12:1:1 classes at P233Q are utilizing the RIGOR reading program (Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers). A focus is placed on expository, letter, descriptive, and persuasive writing. In terms of math, the focus is on fundamental money skills using the Attainment math program. Many of the HS school students use the "Power of Choice" Behavior Management Program. Reading, writing, and math skills are generalized when using the "Power of Choice." program as students are expected to track the daily "points" they earn each period. If they earn enough points by the end of the week, they are able to attend a selected club (i.e. sports, music, games, etc.) During clubs, ELL students are encouraged to socialize and interact with fellow students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P233Q is not planning to discontinue any program/s services for the 2017-2018 school year. Due to the success of program during the 2016-2017 school year, it is not necessary to discontinue the program/s. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The school's philosophy and practice is to support ELLs and improve upon each ELLs individual success given their current level of language skills and overall ability to integrate into their community. In addition, all ELLs are invited to take part in our Title lll Saturday Supplemental Program. P233Q uses an adapted curriculum that is aligned to the New York State Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Established instructional activities are designed to provide each student with rigorous and relevant learning opportunities for all subject areas. The reading and math programs and materials utilized are selected to address each ELL student’s learning needs/challenges. Given functional academics, students learn relevant life skills in both Math and ELA. Particular strategies are used to improve overall learning outcomes. Strategies can include but are not limited to the use of visual cues, photographs paired with print, hands on interactive learning tasks, project based learning, team building opportunities, and the use of social scripts and the use of manipulatives. The P233Q adapted curriculum also targets other content areas of learning to include but not limited to: personal behaviors such as interpersonal skills, organizational skills, citizenship and self-reliance. Each instructional module/unit is designed to include vocabulary and concept building activities. To further support learning, specific interactive lessons are planned. For older students learned concepts are then generalized to vocational tasks. Instruction includes experiences that address social, academic, and life skills. Each of the four modalities of English Literacy is infused into all aspects of instruction. All students are provided with community based instruction in order to apply all that is learned in the classroom to real-world scenarios. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers use different strategies to address the learning needs of ELL students. Our teachers use of variety of objects, pictures, Smartboard activities, and teacher created worksheets (that are age appropriate for the students' grade level) to provide access to the content foe our ELL students. Instructional materials used to instruct ELL students include use of the: Smart Board, IPADs, VIZZLE program, Mayer Johnson symbols, authentic pictures, Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, thinking maps, math manipulatives, dictionaries, fiction and non-fiction books. To foster participation and the comprehension of concepts, teachers integrate technology using websites, educational software, Smartboard activities, and the VIZZLE program. In 2018-19 CEP 67  addition, students use technology to further improve their reading and writing skills (i.e. write letters, send emails, etc.). By using technology, lessons become more interactive as well as increase the student's overall motivation to learn. Project based learning and access to technology serve to address different learning styles when delivering instruction. Each classroom has a language rich environment. Technology, multi-sensory and interactive lessons provide ELLs with the ability to strengthen their vocabulary and further improve their English language skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At this time, P233Q does not have a TBE or DL program. In the absence of these programs, our bilingual ELL students are provided with an Alternate Placement paraprofessional. This paraprofessional provides access to the classroom content in the native language of the student. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Programs are used at the appropriate grade level for our ELL students, and our ENL teachers, with the support of the Alternate Placement paraprofessional (when applicable), will provide access to the content in the student's native language. All the programs used by P233Q are strategically researched by administration to ensure they are appropriate to support the needs of our students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ENL teachers will share resources with the ENL teachers in co-located buildings which include, testing materials and classroom materials used with our ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our projected newly enrolled ELL students are invited to participate in our Chapter 683 summer program before they start the official school year. This gives our ELL students a chance to meet the staff and students in the school. For every newly enrolled ELL student, our ENL teachers meet with each parent and student to describe our school and specifically our ENL program. In September, each site holds a "Meet and Greet" with the parents of our newly enrolled students. Our parent coordinator facilitates these meetings, and both ENL teachers attend at their particular sites.To provide equal access all ELLs (including our newly enrolled ELL students) are invited to participate in the school's supplemental Title lll Saturday program. At P233Q, the Title lll program implemented a cooking program called, “FLAVORS OF THE WORLD”. The focus of the program was vocabulary building and oral language development for the ELL students and their parents. To facilitate this undertaking, students met for six consecutive Saturdays. This Saturday experience provided an opportunity for language expansion while developing a multicultural understanding in a creative and fun environment for each of the ELL students. In order to further strengthen the home - school connection, as Title lll students were involved in the cooking program, their parents partnered in a “Computer Literacy Workshop” which allowed them to learn ways they could assist to help their child succeed. This workshop enabled parents to access information through bilingual interpreters (paraprofessionals). P233Q will continue to implement this program for the 2017-2018 year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Presently P233 does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Presently P233 does not offer any Dual language programs. 2018-19 CEP 68  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL Compliance: NYSESLAT ELL Compliance: ELL Compliance Binder Documents Planning Thematic Units for ELLS with Disabilities Designing Effective Classroom Assessment for Ells with Severe Disabilities 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In September, workshops are held for parents to discuss various topics, [i.e. Social Security (SSI) , Health Insurance, SNAP, etc.]. In addition, in October, an orientation session was held to discuss ELL methodologies and strategies used to enhance learning for newly enrolled and existing ELL students. Parents of our ELL students are invited to meet with our ENL teachers at this orientation, and letters are sent out, in varying home languages, to indicate the time and date(s) for these meetings. The parent coordinator for the school assists in this process. For students at the high school level, an Open Door/Transition meeting was held by the Transition Coordinator, Ms. Pam Gaynor. Other topics discussed at scheduled parent meetings, by different stakeholders, included: overall ELL education, behavior management needs, functional learning needs of students, home-school connection, post 21 placement facilities, etc. Our ENL teachers are required to attend all IEP meetings (for ELL students) and Parent Teacher Conferences to discuss the students' progress. During these meetings, our ENL teachers discuss the progress the students' have made toward language acquisition including classroom reports, and scores from the assessments our ELL students participate in. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. To further encourage parent involvement in school activities, a parental instructional component was added to the Saturday program as part of the Title III grant. This opportunity allowed parents to learn how to use technology. Also, parents were invited to attend special events held after school in December and May. In December, the school hosted a holiday party and dance, and in May, the school hosted a family fun night. For all events, parents were encouraged to socialize with other families as well as share any concerns they might have. Bilingual staff was available to speak with parents and/or communicate for parents, at all events/meetings. 2018-19 CEP 69  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debbie Edmonds, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P233 School DBN: 29 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Mrs. Debbie Edmonds Principal Mr. Michael DiGiovanni Assistant Principal Ms. Laura Castano Parent Coordinator Ms. Farida Jhaveri ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Belinda Velez Parent Mr. Michael DiGiovanni Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Pam Gaynor Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Sheree Friedman Coach Coach Mr. John Hamilton School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q233 School Name: P233 Superintendent: Ketler Louissa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Laura Castano Parent Coordinator NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The need for written and oral translation will be determined via the following: consultation with school staff, review of individual home language identification surveys, a verbal or written request from a parent or advocate, language needs noted on the IEP as per CSE, review of the Parent level I transition document, and applicable ATS reports. When a language need is determined, the appropriate arrangements are made for parents to ensure translation and relevant written materials are provided in one's native language. When applicable, appropriate translation services and/or translated documents will be provided at planned meetings (i.e. at the IEP meeting; at a transition planning meeting; at parent-teacher conferences; at parent support meetings; and at parent trainings). When necessary, written notification will be provided to parents in their native language for all home/school correspondences. Using biographical data, home language survey responses, and student/parent shared information and review of ARIS and ATS data, we identify households wherein English may not be the primary spoken language. This information is then confirmed via phone calls to the home and/or in person interviews with students, parents and guardians. We have a parent coordinator, as well as two guidance counselors for this outreach/work. 2018-19 CEP 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AMHARIC (AKA ETHIOPIAN) 1 ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY CANTONESE DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN GUJARATI GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI KHMER (AKA CAMBOGE) KOREAN 2 1 21 21 0 2 1 1 3 1 2 MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) NEPALI ENGLISH PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) RUSSIAN 7 1 1 .13 .26 .13 2.68 2.68 0 .26 .13 .13 .38 .13 .26 .89 .13 .13 1 2 2 21 8 3 2 1 2 3 1 2 7 1 1 .13 .26 .26 2.69 1.02 .38 .26 .13 .26 .38 .13 .26 .9 .13 .13 646 82.5 644 82.35 3 1 .38 .13 3 1 .38 .13 2018-19 CEP 74  SPANISH URDU MANDARIN 67 1 0 66 1 10 8.44 .13 1.28 8.56 .13 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent coordinator ensures that all documents that are sent home are available in the preferred languages of our parents. PA meetings -Monthly Transition meetings Monthly calendars -Monthly -Monthly 2018-19 CEP 75  Open House Photo and Web permission slips -October -September School Holidays -When Applicable Parent Teacher conferences -November and April Monthly Parent Training Meetings Monthly The parent coordinator ensures that all documents that are sent home are available in the preferred languages of our parents. The parent coordinator ensures that all documents that are sent home are available in the preferred languages of our parents. The parent coordinator ensures that all documents that are sent home are available in the preferred languages of our parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to 1. Parent / Teacher conferences - held twice a year via afternoon and evening sessions. 1)October/November 2017-April 2018 2. IEP meetings 3. Behavioral planning meetings as applicable 4. Transition meetings 2) Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year 3)Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year provide interpretation service(s)? The school will provide translation services via school staff that speak the language, and or via the DOE translation service system. 2018-19 CEP 76  5. Family fun night 4) )Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year 6. Holiday parties 5) June 2018 7. Assemblies 6)December 2017 8. Supervised tours of over 21 programs 7))Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year 8) )Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year 9. Special Event 9) )Ongoing throughout 2017-2018 school year 10. Monthly Parent Trainings 10)1X per month 2017-2018 school year The school will provide translation services via school staff that speak the language, and or via the DOE translation service system. The school will provide translation services via school staff that speak the language, and or via the DOE translation service system. 11. Monthly parent-council meetings 11) 1X per month 2017-2018 school year The school will provide translation services via school staff that speak the language, and or via the DOE translation service system. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In an emergency, the first step would be to find a staff member in the organization who could provide translation services. The next step (in our co-located buildings) would be to reach out to staff in the building. If there was no one available beyond that, we would reach out to translation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be addressed at the staff PD in September. Furthermore, our ENL teachers will review during school/site level ENL PD during the school year. 2018-19 CEP 77  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our parent coordinator serves as our language access coordinator. Her role is to coordinate any needed documentation to be sent in for translating and or arrange for translation and interpretation services for over the phone or in person meetings. She will have a list of languages spoken at home by our students' parents. She will translate all brochures and flyers sent home to parents to ensure they receive the information in their native languages. This was decided as a need through the use of ATS data analysis, student interviews, home language surveys upon enrollment and student applications to our school. Each site conducted a survey of the languages spoken by our staff members. With this information, we have a master list of staff members who can translate during parent meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback is provided by way of translated telephone conversations using school staff, the parent survey, DOE translators if necessary, student communication notebooks, parent selected translators (i.e. Family members and/or friends, etc.), child’s Medicaid Service Provider and/ or an advocate. 2018-19 CEP 78 
