2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q235 School Name: ACADEMY FOR NEW AMERICANS Principal: BETTY CARTAGENA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: ACADEMY FOR NEW AMERICANS 30Q235 343000010235 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 30-14 30 TH STREET 4 TH FLOOR LONG ISLAND CITY NY 11106 718-956-4140 714-956-4145 Phone Number: Fax: MS. BETTY CARTAGENA Bcartagena3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: BETTY CARTAGENA Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: None DALIALARA JIMMY JOZA CARMEN ELENA ARAUJO none none District Information Geographical District: 30 DR. PHILIP COMPOSTO Superintendent: 28-11 QUEENS PLAZA NORTH 5 TH FLOOR LONG ISLAND CITY NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 391-8323 Phone Number: (718)391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mr. Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 QUEENS PLAZA NORTH City QUEENS NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 391-8231 Phone Number: (718)391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name BETTY CARTAGENA NONE DALIALARA N/A CARMEN ELENA ARAUJO N/A N/A N/A JIMMY JOZA FATIMA SASSI CHRISTINA ROSA Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/GUIDANCE COUNSELOR Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LUZ MARINA RODRIGUEZ DANAYRAMIREZ SANDRA YANETHBERMUDEZ EVELYN GOMEZ Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/PARENT Member/TEACHER Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION Section 4: CEP Overview I.S. 235Q, the Academy for New Americans, provides a programmatic educational program designed to assist newly arrived immigrant students in grades 6, 7 & 8, who need to develop proficiency in the English language. We assist the students and their families in adapting to their new environment and coping with the many challenges that may accompany immigrating to New York City. The Academy provides an excellent array of educational, counseling and 2018-19 CEP 9  human services programs on a transitional basis to help meet the linguistic, instructional, emotional and social needs of our students and their families. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. I.S.235, the Academy for New Americans is a very special and unique school in New York City. Our program strives to provide a dynamic environment and quality education which prepares students for the rigors of high school, college and careers. Our students are required to wear their school uniform every day. In case of an emergency, the school uniform allows first responders/staff members to quickly identify our students and ensure their safety. All our classrooms are equipped with Smart boards. Every classroom also has a computer cart with thirty Apple Mac Air laptops to be used by the students. Printers are also available for student use in each classroom. PARTNERSHIPS  CASA-Queens Theatre - Students receive extracurricular activities with a focus on Performing Arts  Elmcor-Youth & Adult Activities & Office of School Mental Health DOE - Students and families will receive socio-emotional and mental health services on site and at off-site locations.  Office of Arts and Special Projects NYC DOE-Provides support to our school by offering partnerships with cultural institutions and by providing professional platforms for students to share their work. Through these supports, students are able to grow creatively and intellectually, while having positive outlets for self-expression. The F-status Arts Teacher program allowed us to hire a Visual Arts teacher.  ThriveNYC-This resource offers a significant investment and gives major attention to the problems and the populations it is designed to address. The Roadmap to Mental Health for All is proposed as a momentous and valued supplement to the under-funded and much stretched array of community-based services currently supported by the State and City.  New York Edge-Sports & Arts Foundation-SASF- During afterschool and Saturday program, our students receive additional enrichment activities and academic support, participate in clubs (Volleyball, Soccer, Chess, Fencing, Drama, Visual Arts, STEAM, Leadership skills, Cartooning, Computer Science and Literacy & Homework Tutoring) over the course of the school year. Saturday Academy- Students received additional support and learning opportunities that emphasize real world learning and problem solving.  Our school’s instructional focus for the 2018-19 academic year is to prioritize on language and literacy demands to support newcomer ELL students. The school community will build and increase English language proficiency skills aligned to the CCSS across all content areas. Therefore, our aim will be: -To provide supports in the instructional core for English language proficiency skills so that newcomer students show growth and meet academics aligned to CCSS. -To implement instructional strategies that promote English language skills so that newcomer ELLs can communicate for social and instructional purposes. -To incorporate best practices that increase literacy and English language skills so that newcomer ELLs can communicate information and concepts necessary for academic success in content areas: ELA, Social Studies, Math, and Science. 2018-19 CEP 10  -To deliver a strategic plan so that newcomer students can be on the path towards college and career readiness. -To foster diversity and equality in education so that our students can compete in today’s 21st century global society and become productive citizens. I.S. 235 staff members demonstrate an active ‘Outreach to Parents’ for parent involvement and visits to the school. A school calendar is created for parents in order to further their participation in school events. These include fund-raising activities, Saturday Health Information Fair, monthly P.A. meetings with workshops and participation in school-wide celebrations and events. There is a high level of attendance at monthly SLT meetings including DOE SLT trainings. New initiatives to engage and assist students, parents and families include resources and workshops aligned to a School Mental Health plan. The plan includes services offered by Elmcor Youth and Adult Activities, Inc. and also School Mental Health Consultant from the DOE Office of School Health. One to one intervention services to students and families, presentation in classes. A list of referral resources is available for the counseling of students and families to resolve academic, social or personal problems. The school guidance counselor and parent coordinator will share resources from the workshop ‘Know Your Rights’ to students and families throughout the school year. The School Mental Health consultant will also identify and obtain community based organizations to provide links for workshops on the following topics: Parenting Skills, Cyber Safety, LGBTQ, and Gang Awareness. The parent coordinator will schedule directly with CBOs to obtain multilingual facilitators in order for workshops to be completed by June 2019. The parent coordinator will also communicate this information to the parents in English and in Spanish by creating and disseminating monthly parent newsletters. She will send school and DOE correspondence to the parents in a variety of languages. We will continue with our weekly Open House on Tuesdays ‘Parent Engagement’ with teachers and a Welcome Breakfast with the Principal at the beginning of the school year. Our school has an open-door policy. We pride ourselves on our relationship with our parents. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school admits students year round who are English Language Learners and have recently arrived to the country. The focus of the school is to develop English language skills and cultural awareness in a very short time. Consequently, the school has open enrollment throughout the school year. Students remain at the Academy for only one school year. The sixth and seventh graders are then transferred to their zoned school. The eighth graders move on to the high schools. As a result of the short period of time that the students are in the school, there are no identified special education students; but, the school services a group of students with interrupted formal education (SIFE). Students come from all over the world and represent 38 countries and 18 languages. Besides newcomers’ different native languages and countries of origin, the differences in their literacy skills and educational backgrounds prove to be the most important factors for our newcomer program’s design. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. MOST PROGRESS The 2017-18 School Quality Guide-Framework for Great schools has demonstrated an increase on the following ELEMENT SCORES: ELEMENT RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP 2016-17 4.14 4.17 4.74 2017-18 4.20 4.17 4.80 2018-19 CEP 11  STRONG FAMILY-COMMUNITY TIES 3.54 3.89 School Survey Element Scores ELEMENT RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP STRONG FAMILY-COMMUNITY TIES 2016-17 4.58 4.55 4.74 3.28 2017-18 4.82 4.93 4.80 3.70 Our school has also demonstrated in the Quality Review 2014-15 a Well-Developed progress in the following indicators: Instructional Core, Pedagogy (1.2) and School Culture, High Expectations (3.4). The strengths and accomplishments of I.S. 235 include several new collaborative initiatives that involve the school building leader, pedagogues and parents; recognizing and celebrating excellent teaching practices; increased professional development for educators and new initiatives to communicate with parents. These collaborative initiatives include a school-based team for professional development of teaching practices and a school-wide approach to develop additional collaborative opportunities for educators, students and parents-families. SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT/RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION: An Instructional Lead from QNFSC will provide five sessions of professional learning for all teachers in the areas of literacy and formative assessment on Monday afternoons. These sessions will provide support to all teachers in planning lessons with a focus on academic language and literacy development as well as reading and writing skills so that all students including targeted students, may have access to curricula and promote English language acquisition. Results for the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT demonstrated that of the 137 students that were tested, 54% (n=74) of 6th, 7th and 8th grade newcomer students are at Transitional and Expanding levels. 15% of all students (n=20) are at the Commanding level. 31% (n=43) of all students are at Entering/Emerging Levels. KEY AREAS OF FOCUS: We will be continue to focus on the following elements of the Capacity Framework:  QR Indicator 1.1 Instructional Core- Provide multiple points of access to Curriculum with extended thinking tasks  QR Indicator 2.2 Enhance teacher- use of formative assessment in the classroom  QR Indicator 3.4 Strong Family-Community Ties- Increase Parental Involvement in school Our key areas of focus for the 2018-19 school year will be to strengthen the Instructional Core across classrooms: Vocabulary, reading comprehension skills and formative assessments in the classroom (1.1, 2.2). As a learning community, we will focus on addressing our challenge of implementing qualitative measures of student progress in all core subject areas. Lesson and unit plans will be revised and aligned to assessment data by teacher teams. Support will be provided to teachers in creating Leveled DOK Questions and modifications in parameters/criterion for academic tasks. We will implement a school-wide focus in Math and Science for literacy and use of formative assessment. The Spring 2018 English Language Arts and Mathematics State Exam results created a sense of reflection for all I.S. 235 stakeholders. 2018-19 CEP 12  In ELA, of the ENL students that were tested (n=62), 82% (n=51) students scored level 1 and 18% (n=11) scored Levels 2. In Math, of the 135 students tested in Math, 60% (n=81) scored level 1, 21% (n=29) scored level 2, 13% (n=17) scored level 3 and 6% (n=8) scored a level 4 on the Spring 2018 Math state test. RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION: As a result, the entire school community will focus on improving the quality of student learning and assessment that takes place in our classrooms daily by; participating in targeted professional learning anchored to literacy-writing across the content areas and use of formative assessment. Vertical teams will enhance instruction planning and assessment preparation. Instructional lessons and tasks will incorporate language and literacy-writing objectives with leveled questions and multiple points of entry. Teacher teams will plan cohesive assessment tasks with a focus on Literacy-writing and Math skills. The school inquiry team will work with teacher teams on the school wide student assessment data including item skills analysis, trends and major findings in every department: ENL/ELA, mathematics, social studies, science instruction and Home Language Arts. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q235 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 101 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 100.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 65.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 0.0% N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 95.9% 3.0% 1.0% 2.0% 19.8% 0.0% 0 42% 7 18.5% 18% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SCHOOL STRENGTHS: Areas of Celebration: Based on the last School Quality Review Report the school has exhibited strengths in the areas of: Instruction Core-Pedagogy 1.2 and School Culture- High Expectations 3.4, both Well-developed. The school’s belief is that students learn best with clear expectations, modeling and opportunities to collaborate/discuss with peers was evident In all classrooms. The school exhibits a very warm and welcoming culture where, students, staff and families feel valued and respected. Students are engaged in collaborative dialogue and class work that are focused on student learning. Students are provided with many opportunities to socialize intelligence and practice English in all modalities; a critical component in developing a commanding level of proficiency in English. There is a strength on the quality of instruction ensuring teachers prepare and deliver rigorous lessons and academic tasks that provide active cognitive engagement, vocabulary supports, a range of Webb’s Depth of Knowledge question levels, multiple entry points into curricula and/or differentiated supports, including extensions. 4.1, Feedback on teacher observations are aligned to the Danielson Framework and state lesson specific information focused on teacher pedagogy that are leveraged to advance teacher practice. Professional learning plan aligns with the needs of teachers that are aligned of students and needs of teachers as evident in Advance MOTP summary reports. 4.2 & 5.1: A schoolwide assessment system implemented in teams that provides actionable feedback to students and allows teachers to identify patterns and trends in data. Data and specific trends are aligned to school’s professional learning plan. Spring 2018 NYSESLAT: The percentage of Entering and Emerging for our newcomer students significantly decreased for grades 7 (n=) resulting in an increase of students performing at a higher level of proficiency: 52% (n=29) scored Transitioning and Expanding Levels. Compared to last year 2017, 39% of the 6th grade scored at the Entering and Emerging levels. This shows a significant student growth in English language acquisition from grade to the next grade level. For all grades, 54% are performing at Transitional and Expanding levels (n=74), 46% of the students are performing at the Commanding level (n=20) compared to last year 2017, 54% (n=100), performed at the transitional and expanding levels and 11% (n=20) performed at the Commanding level . 2018-19 CEP 15  PRIORITY NEEDS AND AREAS OF FOCUS: Focus will continue to be on the Framework Element: Rigorous Instruction. The school will continue to support teachers with planning independent student tasks that engages students moving toward more student-centered classroom environments (1.1). The school will re-evaluate and strengthen the instructional core and streamline a school-wide student progress monitoring system including formative assessments in the classroom. Teachers inconsistently make adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. QR-Indicator 2.2 Assessment. Based on grade 6-8 results of the Spring 2018 NY State Assessments in NYSESLAT and ELA, there is a continuous need to focus on student language/literacy development in order to show more language acquisition growth and to increase students’ performance on the ELA State Test. Data sources: Spring 2018 NYSESLAT Data: These tests indicated that of 137 students tested, 31% (n=43) performed at the Entering and Emerging levels on this state exam. Compared to last year 2017, of the 185 students tested, 35% (n=65) performed at the Entering and Emerging levels. Spring 2018 ELA Data: Of the 62 students tested, 32% (n=20) in grades 6-8 met the cut score on the New York State ELA exam as stated on the Subject Performance report-RASP. 100% (n=62) scored levels 1 & 2 on the Spring 2018 ELA NYS exam. There is a focus on longitudinal growth for targeted students on levels 1 and 2 in grades 7 & 8. The percentage of level 1 for our newcomer students is significantly high for all grades. There is a low performance for students who took the ELA state test for the first time. This is a concern because of the mission of the school. I.S 235 is a school for newly arrived adolescent immigrants. In order for our students to show progress on the ELA state test within one school year in the spring, they must begin taking intensive Stand Alone ENL classes and integrated ENL/ELA or content area. This means that they must be on track in terms of their language and academic abilities because as a part of I.S. 235’s intensive English language curriculum, they will be taking New York State examinations in the following areas: NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science (Grade 8 only). The students, regardless of their academic knowledge or English proficiency, are being held to high standards as these are high stakes exams. Also, I.S. 235 needs to strive to continue to improve teacher practice to support rigorous instruction, adjustment of curriculum and instruction for student achievement. Assessments across the board (formative, summative) indicate areas of needs in academic vocabulary, reading skills and numerical skills. The use of leveled questions, multiple points of entry, scaffolds, extensions in lessons for higher performing students, specific criterion in academic tasks and teachers’ practice of “checks for understanding” for assessment in most content area subjects need to be more structured in lessons and evident in the classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 16  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 6% of targeted-returning students who scored at Emerging, Transitioning & Expanding levels on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT will show an Expanding or Commanding level of English language proficiency as measured in the Spring 2019 NYSESLAT test. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Teachers will be engaged in targeted professional development opportunities in order to have a normed understanding of student achievement: -Year Round School Based Plan for in-house teacher professional learning on Monday afternoons. -Registration for off-site professional learning series offered by QNFSC and DOE. -In-House Professional Learning provided by QNFSC Instructional Leads focused on reading skills and use of formative assessment. -School wide CSR (Collaborative Strategic Reading) model training for all teacher teams. -Modifications of the school master schedule to include common administrative periods three times a week for teacher teams by subject area and across content area subjects and also inquiry/cabinet meetings. -ENL teachers will work with core subject teachers to develop common core aligned performance tasks according to students' English proficiency levels during weekly C6 meetings. -Core Subject teams will ensure vertical alignment of curriculum with 'Access for All' in every subject to better prepare students for the rigors of the common core with evidence of leveled questions, scaffolds (differentiation) and extension tasks with criteria for the higher performing students. -Physical Education teacher will attend professional learning series provided by the DOE Health & Wellness to receive updated instructional strategies that promote vocabulary and literacy skills. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Teacher Leaders, District CSD 30 Borough Field (FSC) Instructional Support Facilitators 2018-19 CEP 18  -Parent Coordinator will schedule workshops for the parents/guardians in order to provide them with them with the tools to successfully monitor their children’s work throughout the school year. Physical Education Teacher Students September 2018-2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Parents/ Guardians September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Teacher Leaders, Core Subject Teachers Teachers will be involved in a school-wide assessment system by: All Teachers -Using formative and summative assessments to inform instructional decisions. -Implementing teacher-checks for understanding in the classroom and other formative assessment. -Using progress monitoring tools in the classroom like checks for understanding, Rubrics, Exit Tickets and student portfolios to measure progress. -Implementing a structured data analysis system across the board to identify major findings and trends: *Data from State Assessments for returning focus students (lowest third population) Spring 2018: NYSESLAT, ELA *Performance Series-ELA *ENL-Language Placements tests analysis reports *Data Analysis for ELL Periodic Assessments Fall 2018 and Mid-Year Assessment -Spring 2019 *HLA -Spanish Reading Assessment *School-wide reports generated by Jupiter Ed. 2018-19 CEP 19  School will incorporate research -based instructional strategies and resources to address the needs of students by: All Teachers and September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Teacher Leaders, Core Subject Teachers -Using Marzano's Academic Vocabulary strategy: Students will build vocabulary and apply concepts by daily entry of new words and meanings in the Marzano's Vocabulary Notebook. -Enhancing Vocabulary and Reading: Students will complete Math journals to reinforce academic vocabulary and writing skills. Students will use reading strategies to comprehend science concepts. -Describing the 'Access for All' supports in lessons/unit plans: vocabulary, DOK essential questions, learning tasks and criteria for evaluation, evidence of scaffolds and multiple points of entry, extensions for the higher performing students. newcomer ELLs including lowest third population (returning students. -Using Visuals, hands on activities and technology for different learning styles. -Adapting curriculum resources: ENL/ELA 'Inside the USA-Language and Vocabulary' by National Geographic, Building Basic Vocabulary by Robert J Marzano, Oxford Illustrated Science Dictionaries, Wordly Wise 3000 workbooks, Finish Line Reading and Writing. -Implement Instructional Strategies to promote student engagement: Accountable Talk structure, graphic organizers, Think-Pair-Share, Jig-Saw,Turn & Talk, Real world- life scenarios, prompts and group presentations. -Tax Levy funds, Title I and Title III will be used to provide after-school and Saturday Academy sessions for language enrichment and academic intervention-ENL/ELA and Literacy. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Staff, September 2018-2019 Principal, ENL Teachers Students Content Area Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will engage families and support their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home by: 2018-19 CEP 20  -Parents and students will be able to view student progress on Jupiter Ed, the web-based system that the school uses to maintain records of assessments. -Providing opportunities for parents of all students to participate in “Meet the Teacher-Curriculum Night” and Tuesday afternoons to learn about the CCLS, the school focus and the rigor of the learning skills for each core subject. -Inviting parents and families to a Family Reading Night in December 2018. -Reaching out to parents to encourage them to attend the four parent teacher conferences throughout the year. -Offering specific monthly workshops sponsored by the school on understanding CCLS and how to help their children in reading and practicing the English language every day. -Title I funds will be used to obtain and provide parents with CCLS informational booklets in their home language during the parent welcome orientation during Curriculum Night-Meet the Teacher in September 2018. -Providing parents with a school-wide criteria for evaluation and how to monitor student performance and progress in CCLS reading and writing skills as well as learning indicators for core subjects. -Providing parents with student progress reports three times (Initial, Mid-Year and End of the school year) with detailed CCLS skills and areas of growth. -Providing opportunities for parents to discuss with teachers the core curriculum and course syllabus during the first two parent-teacher conferences (September 2018, November 2018). -Inviting parents to attend Student-Led conferences for College and Career readiness -Providing parents with NYS & NYC testing schedules for the school year as well as monthly school calendars -Asking parents to be active participants in their child’s education by maintaining ongoing communication with the teachers especially during the Tuesday afternoon designated for parent engagement. Timeline and Key Personnel: September 2018-2019 Principal, School Staff, Parent Coordinator, Guidance counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program school, we use Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state and local funds such as Title I, Title III, Title III Immigrant and Tax Levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations in order to realize our instructional strategies/goals/activities. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program during the 2018-2019 fiscal year: The Sports and Arts School Foundation-SASF- will offer after-school program/clubs for performing arts/drama and visual arts. Title III Part A and Title III Immigrant will provide funds for after-school academic enrichment and Saturday Academy in ENL/ELA, math and science. We will schedule funds from Title I to provide professional learning sessions to school staff and parents. CASA ‘Queens Theatre in the Park’ grant will enhance language development through Art activities during after school. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019; Targeted(n=74) returning ENL newcomer students will demonstrate progress on English language acquisition and academic performance based on an administration of ENL Baseline and Mid-Term tests and Spring 2019 ELL Periodic assessment and Performance Series ELA reports. There will be a mid-point summative assessment benchmark, which will indicate a 5% of longitudinal progress data towards meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress monitoring tools: Internal: School Generated Assessments: ENL School Placement Tests with Findings and Trends reports Student Progress Reports (SPR): October 2018, January 2019, April 2019 External Assessments: ELL Periodic Assessment Benchmarks– Fall and Spring, Scantron Performance Series ELA reports-Fall and Mid-Year Assessment 5c: February 2019 Mid-Point Progress Assessments: ENL School Baseline and Mid-term Tests with Findings and Trends reports 7th Grade: Entering/Emerging Level: Based on the results of the mid-year test, the students showed progress in all the skills. Even though they made progress in the writing skills, this skill remains at the lowest proficiency level because 93% of the students scored below 50%. Therefore, writing will be the area of focus in the ENL classes. 2018-19 CEP 22  93% of the students in 7th grade at the Entering, Emerging and Low Transitioning Proficiency Levels who took the Mid Year Assessment in January 2019 made progress as compared to the Baseline Assessment administered in the fall of 2018. 59% of the students’ overall scores are below 50%. Two students (7%) didn’t make progress. Transitional and Expanding levels: Based on the results of the mid-year test, the students in 7th grade showed progress in all the skills. Even though they made progress in the writing skills, this skill remains at the lowest proficiency level because 67% of the students scored below 50%. Therefore, writing will be the area of focus in the ENL classes. 100% of the students in 7th grade at the High Transitioning and Expanding Proficiency Levels who took the Mid Year Assessment in January 2019 made progress as compared to the Baseline Assessment administered in the fall of 2018. 67% of the students’ overall scores are at least 50%. Two students’ overall scores are below 50%. Both students have been enrolled over a year. 8th Grade: Entering and Emerging Levels: Based on the results of the mid-year test, the students in 8th grade showed progress in all the skills. Even though they made progress in the writing skills, this skill remains at the lowest proficiency level because 84% of the students scored below 50%. Therefore, writing will be the area of focus in the ENL classes. 96% of the students in 8th grade at the Entering, Emerging and Low Transitioning Proficiency Levels who took the Mid Year Assessment in January 2019 made progress as compared to the Baseline Assessment administered in the fall of 2018. 69% of the students’ overall scores are below 50%. Two students (4%) didn’t make progress. They are (SIFE). Both these students scored at the Entering proficiency level on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. Two other students performed at the lowest proficiency level in writing. Transitional and Expanding levels: Based on the results of the mid-year test, the students in 8th grade High Transitioning and Expanding Proficiency levels showed progress in all the skills. Even though 95% of the students improved their scores in writing, the progress in this skill is still not significant. Therefore, writing will continue to be the area of focus in the ENL classes. 100% of the students in 8th grade at the High Transitioning and Expanding Proficiency Levels who took the Mid Year Assessment in January 2019 made progress as compared to the Baseline Assessment administered in the fall of 2018. 95% of the students’ overall scores are at least 50%. Two students have not made significant progress in writing. Their scores in writing are below 22%. Both students have been enrolled over a year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school exhibits the following strengths on the Framework Element: Supportive Environment: 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide – Supportive Environment: The school received a metric score of 4.93 on the NYC School Survey. Overall we received 92% metric value; 4.93 Metric Score and 37% Weight Percent. 2017-18 School Quality Guide/ MS report reflects the following: -According to the NYC School Survey Measures, 89% of students and teachers responded positively to questions about classroom behavior; 98% of the students responded positively to questions about Guidance; 93% of students and teachers responded positively for Peer Support for Academic Work; 96% for Safety; and 100% for Social Emotional Support. Based on the last NYC School Quality Review, the school received a score of: 4.99 - Well Developed- on how clearly are high expectations communicated to students and staff? (3.4) Priority Needs and Areas of Focus- Framework Element: Supportive Environment – NYC School Survey Measures: Personal Attention and Support Score: 85%: The data revealed that 69% of the students say that their teachers support them when they are upset and help them when they fall behind. Preventing Bullying Score: 84%: The data revealed that 78% of the students say that they rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. Classroom Behavior: Score 89%- The data revealed that 78% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. All staff will continue to provide students with support academically and emotionally in order to prepare them with the skills necessary in a 21st century global society. This entails the students being fully engaged in the learning process. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will have participated in at least three “Positive Ways” and “Respect for All” activities in order to help build a culture of empathy, equity, and engagement across our school. Progress towards this goal will be measured by a 4% increase in positive responses from students from 84% to 88% on the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-Based Instructional Programs and Strategies to Address the Needs of All our Students: Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 -The school guidance counselor will meet with teacher teams to plan student activities and tasks embedded in lessons to incorporate ‘Respect for All’ curriculum. -The guidance counselor will address out of school barriers to learning through partnerships with social and health service agencies/providers. -Partnership with Elmcore Inc to provide students with in-class (14 sessions) lesson presentations involving Life Skills and social emotional awareness. -The School Mental Health consultant will also assist in providing links and resources for a web-based training: ‘Kognito’s At Risk’. This training will coach teachers and staff to identify approach and appropriately refer at-risk students. -Social and Emotional Curriculum: Overcoming Obstacles. This is an SEL curriculum that teachers and staff can utilize in the classroom. It is activity based and focuses on three core competencies : communication, decision making and goal setting. -Teachers will receive the following workshops and trainings: Making Educators Partners: Highlights warning signs of students at risk (suicide prevention, self-injury). -Generation Q will facilitate the LGBTQ 101 training and the Child Center of New York will provide a Trauma 101 training to all staff. These trainings will assist teachers to respond to student mental School Principal, School-Administration Team Guidance Counselor Elmcore Youth Development Inc. School Mental Health Consultant 2018-19 CEP 26  health needs and enhance school’s ability to provide services to the students. -ENL and Social Studies teachers will connect with another school through technology to have students create scenarios in finding solutions to current events. -The guidance counselor will reach out the school mental consultant to provide in class presentations Mental 101 -The guidance counselor will provide in class lessons/modules from Acquiring Core skills and problem solving skills curriculum -Physical education teacher will implement physical activities that lead students directly to the development of leadership skills-(confidence, character, strategic and problem-solving skills). Students September 2018-June 2019 Physical Education teacher Evidence of Instructional strategies in the Classroom: Teachers, -ENL and Social Studies teachers will connect with another school through technology to have students create scenarios in finding solutions to current events. Students September 2018-June2019 School Principal, ENL and Social Studies Teachers -Implement instructional strategies to promote student engagement: Accountable talk structure, graphic organizers, Think-Pair-Share, Jigsaw, Turn & Talk, Gallery Walk, Real-Life Scenarios, Prompts and group presentations. -Using Visuals, hands-on activities and technology "Smart Board' for different learning styles to have students create problem-solving and decision-making ‘cartoon/graphic strips’. Students September-June 2018-2019 School Principal, ENL/Social Studies Teachers Teams Evidence of Support for both Students and Families -Guidance counselor will provide in-class presentations and individual student sessions for social emotional awareness. -Guidance Counselor will provide two evening sessions to inform them about the High School process. Parents, students September 2018-June 2019 School Principal, Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Parent Association 2018-19 CEP 27 -Provide monthly parent workshops sponsored by community centers and DOE school mental health in addition to the monthly Parent Association meetings. -Families will be invited to be engaged in leadership and meaningful volunteer opportunities for school events throughout the school year. -Connect families to community resources that strengthen and support students’ learning and well-being. School Mental Health Consultant 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging Families in the Understanding of a School Supportive Environment in order to Support their Children at Home: -Parents will be encouraged to monitor their child's progress by using the school web-based program Jupiter ED. For those parents who do not have access to a computer at home, the school has made available a computer to be used solely by parents. -School staff will welcome parents and/or legal guardians to discuss school academic expectations and core curriculum/syllabus during the schedule evening conference on September 2018. -School referrals will be arranged to have group of 8th grade students and families to visit specialized high schools. -Teachers establishing ongoing communication with parents by meeting with parents on Tuesday Parent Engagement time. -Connect students and families to community resources that strengthen and support students’ learning and well-being: (Public libraries, museums) -Title I will be used to provide printed information for parents on homework policies and on monitoring and supporting student work at home. -Clearly communicate school policies to all families in their home language (as available). -Engage families in school planning, leadership and meaningful volunteer opportunities. -Establish opportunities for parents to be active participants in the school community by creating a volunteer calendar for the academic school year (Translations, Reading and Writing in the native language, School Functions, In-Class Tutoring) -Engage families in opportunities to work with their children in setting their annual academic, college and career goals (Student-Led Conferences). 2018-19 CEP 28  -Parents will complete a school created Parent Outreach Survey about interests and needs to organize year-long events, workshops and activities. -Invite parents to participate in parent workshops sponsored by the DOE -Strengthen families’ knowledge and skills to support and extend their children’s learning at home and in the community by providing parent workshops sponsored scheduled from September 2018 – June 2019 in addition to the monthly Parent Association meetings. Timeline and Key Personnel: September 2018-June 2019- School Principal, All teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title III and Tax-Levy will provide funds for after-school programs and for parent workshops led by facilitators. Tax levy funds will also provide funds for Professional Development for teachers and staff. Title III and Title III Immigrant will provide funds for instructional resources for Math classes and after-school /Saturday Academy for academic enrichment programs. Title I funds will also be used for Parent Association meetings and school activities. 7th grade activities for College Access for All will be funded by the DOE. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of our 6th, 7th & 8th grade students will demonstrate evidence of taking leadership roles in participating in student-led projects based on socio-emotional awareness and ‘Respect for All’. There will be a generated checklist and rubric as a mid-point summative assessment, which will indicate progress towards meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring tools: Internal: School project based assessments School generated checklists 5c: February 2019 Mid-Point Progress November & December 2018 Student Leadership Team conducted in class visitations to promote participation in the annual Food Drive. They maintained a list of classes for participation and received incentives. 2018-19 CEP 29  All students participated in the 14 sessions –Character Education Program –Elmcor Youth and Adult Activities Inc. Partnership with Elmcore Inc. provided students with in-class (14 sessions) lesson presentations involving Life Skills and social emotional awareness. Students also completed an assessment survey for this curriculum. Half of the student body took part in creating a Banner ‘Words from the Heart’. This banner included words and thoughts about friendship, respect, inclusion. Also, twenty student leaders participated in the Elmcor Summit December 19 2019. In class presentations included School Discipline Code, Respect for All, Sexual harassment, Bullying and Cyber Bullying provided by the Guidance Counselor. Teachers integrated cultural activities as part of their lessons and these are evident by student writing activities. The school leadership team conducted several diversity and equity workshops for teachers (2) and parents (3) workshops during the Fall. The school leadership team in conjunction with the School Mental Health consultant provided workshops to parents and school staff: Trauma 101 , LGBTQ 101 trainings, Crisis Intervention, Sexual Harassment, Bullying and Cyber Bullying, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The school exhibits the following strengths on the Framework Element-Collaborative Teachers: Score is 4.17 with +0.34 compared to District Average and a +0.47 compared to City Average. According to 2017-18 School Quality Guide-Framework for Middle Schools, I.S. 235Q demonstrated a high percent on positive responses on the following NYC School Survey Measures: 1. Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction: 99% of responses from teachers and students are positive. Score: 4.83 with an average increase of +8% compared to district and +9% compared to city average. 2. Quality of Professional Development: 94% of teacher responses are positive with an average increase of +18% compared to district average and +16% compared to city average. 3. School Commitment: 100% of teacher responses are positive with an average increase of +11% compared to district average and +17% compared to city average. 4. Peer Collaboration: 100% of teacher responses are positive with an average increase of +9% compared to district average and +10% compared to city average. Specifically the Quality Review Indicator 4.2 demonstrated a score of 3.50 with a rating of Proficient on the following measure: How well do teachers work with each other? Teaching practices across the vast majority of classrooms are aligned to a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. Structured professional collaborations have typically resulted in improved teacher practice and progress toward goals for groups of students. Teachers strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality supports and extensions into the curriculum. Priority Needs: Focus on Framework Elements: Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teacher Teams. According to the ADVANCE Component Average data, 60.8% of the teachers obtained an Effective rating and 13.9% obtained a rating of developing on Domain 3 Instruction. Based on Advance Overall ratings and feedback to teachers, there is a need for all content areas, with a focus on Math, to implement formative assessments with extended learning activities that promote students to apply concepts. According to the results of the NYC School Survey: Measure of Collaborative Teachers-85% of teachers say that they had the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. NYS Math state exam results. Specifically, data revealed that 9% of 7th graders scored level 3 and 3% scored level 4 on the Spring 2018 NYS 7th Grade Math test compared to the prior school year 2016-17(9% scored a level 3 and 0% 2018-19 CEP 31  scored a level 4. 64% of 7th grade students scored a level 1 and 24% scored a level 2 on the Spring 2018 Math State Exam. 19% of 8th graders scored level 3 and 10% scored a level 4. 46% scored a level 1 and 25% scored a level 2 on the Spring 2018 Math test. We need to decrease the levels 1 and 2 for 7th and 8th graders on the 2019 Math assessment. Therefore, we need all teacher teams to maintain records of all student’s mastery of specific learning objectives (item-analysis of skills) and literacy skills with extended learning tasks. Of the 96 students enrolled at our school, 74 students (7th & 8th) –(Level 1 and Level 2) will be focus students during the school year. All teacher teams with a focus on the math team, will implement a plan to conduct peer-visitations and to also design formative assessment including extended learning tasks for independent student group learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher teams will continue to establish a focus on creating common core aligned lessons with evidence of formative assessments ‘extended learning tasks’ to increase targeted student performance in grades 7-8, by 5% as measured by NYS Common Core Math exam. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will continue to build a culture of professional learning, collective trust and shared responsibility: All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, All Teachers, Teacher Leaders, Data Specialist, Inquiry team -Site based leadership teams -Meeting weekly in content area teams. -Meeting weekly in content area teams with an ENL Specialist (Vertical teams). -Continuance of implementing of a structured data analysis system across the board to identify major findings and trends: *State Assessments Results for Returning Students (Lowest Third Population) -Spring 2018: NYSESLAT, ELA and Math *ENL- Placement Tests analysis reports *ELL Periodic Assessments Fall & Spring *Math, Science & Social Studies – Pre & Mid assessment analysis reports for all students and 'Focus' students in grades 7 and 8. *Home Language Arts-Spanish Literacy Assessment Fall & Spring *Performance Series Diagnostic Reports –ELA & Math -Implementing student self-reflection through use of progress monitoring tools in the classroom like Quick Checks, Exit Tickets and student portfolios to measure progress for all students. -Quarterly school wide reports generated by Jupiter Ed. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal,Teachers, Teacher Leaders, Inquiry/Data Specialists 2018-19 CEP 33  School leader will align the school master schedule to accommodate collaborative instructional team meetings: -Specific weekdays for SLT, cabinet/Inquiry team and Crisis Intervention/Safety team to address the needs of all students. -A common administrative period per week for core subject teams (ENL and Math) and the school leader to meet and discuss 'focus' student work and make curriculum adjustments. -A common administrative period per week for Vertical teams (ENL & Content Area Teams) to align planning with language objectives. -Assignment of a specific meeting time and day for the teacher teams to create and refine a process for assessing student performance. -Generate Item-analysis reports with trends and patterns by teachers to establish intervention in specific skills in each core subject for struggling students. -Use Performance Series reports for ELA and Math to monitor and provide individualized intervention. The School Leader and the School Community will offer and provide Professional Development opportunities: Teachers, -School leader will conduct IPC with individual teachers at the beginning of the school year to develop teacher goals: School-based administration and core subject leaders will work with teachers through the observation cycle (i.e., co-planning, modeling, co-teaching, observation and debriefing) to incorporate instructional strategies and supplemental materials that are both culturally and developmentally appropriate to enhance formative assessments in instruction. -Monitoring of our professional development program will include frequent cycles of teacher observation with actionable feedback focusing on targeted areas of Danielson Domain 3. -Teachers will submit agendas of all outside workshops attended and turnkey the information with the rest of the staff when applicable. -Teachers are advised to maintain a professional development log as part of their professional responsibility. -Focusing on Danielson's Framework: Monday's professional development time will be dedicated providing practices of Planning and Preparation (1a) and Assessment (3d) with an September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Cabinet/Inquiry Team, All Teachers 2018-19 CEP 34  emphasis on academic language, literacy and formative assessment in all classes. Agendas and sign-in sheets of meetings will be maintained in the general office. -Professional Learning Series: Teachers will attend Professional development offered by Queens North Field Support Center, DELLS and other locations throughout the city. -Teachers will also be conducting inter-visitations to other schools in the district to observe practices in Domain 3. Agendas and school created-feedback form of meetings and visits will be maintained in the general office. -Continue to provide support services to new teachers. Parent Engagement: Teachers and Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, -Parent and families will be provided with opportunities for to participate as volunteers to foster communication and learning during Tuesday afternoons, school events and also during Saturday Academy. -Parent Coordinator will assist P.A. in generating monthly newsletter to inform parents and families about Tuesday afternoon as parent engagement and other school events. -The school guidance counselor will generate a monthly calendar with school events and reminder of dates for report cards and student progress reports. -Teachers will maintain communication logs with parents and families to discuss student academic performance and progress as indicated on quarterly student progress reports (SPR). -The parent coordinator will collaborate with all teachers to provide parents with opportunities to meet with teachers during the Tuesday afternoon parent engagement and also on formal parent teacher conferences. Parents /Families -The guidance counselor will provide one to one counseling sessions to students and/or families as needed as well as to also provide referrals to families to resolve academic, social or personal problems. -Workshops will be scheduled in coordination with the school mental health consultant for parents and families to participate in PA meetings and workshops that will foster parent leadership: ‘Parenting Skills-Communicating with your Teen’, ‘Know your Rights-Immigration Resources, NYID’, Cyberbullying, ‘Resources & Information about LGBTQ Community’. School Mental Health Consultant September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, Teachers Parent Coordinator School Mental Health Consultant 2018-19 CEP 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide opportunities for parents and families to participate as volunteers to foster communication and learning. -Collaborative planning time: This will allow teachers across core subjects to generate parent notes with Student Progress Reports (SPR) to address specific needs. Progress reports will be signed by parents and maintained in students' growth portfolios. Teachers will also be able to analyze student feedback using students' self-assessment checklists which will also be kept in the student growth portfolio. -Parent coordinator will serve as the liaison between the school and the families. The parent coordinator will collaborate with all pedagogues to provide parents with opportunities to meet with teachers during the Tuesday afternoon parent engagement. -The guidance counselor will provide one to one counseling sessions to students and/or families as needed. The guidance counselor will also provide referrals to families to resolve academic, social or personal problems. -Parents will be invited to participate in PA meetings and workshops that will foster parent leadership. -There will be a student council that will serve as role models to promote college and career readiness within their constituency. -The School Mental Health Consultant will offer/provide workshops for parents throughout the year. Timeline and Key Personnel: September 2018-2019, Principal, Parent Coordinator, P.A., Teachers, School Mental Health Consultant, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday professional development time, Administrative Periods (C6) for Team meetings, In-Class visitations for facilitators, teacher coverage to engage teachers in professional development opportunities provided by Tax Levy funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 36  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, ENL and Math Teachers will prepare a data analysis report generated by School Generated Baseline and Mid Terms for Math to demonstrate a 3% of targeted student longitudinal progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Generated Math Baseline and Midterm Assessments Scantron Performance Series Mid-Point Data-Analysis Progress reports for each class. Quarterly Student Progress Reports (SPR) Advance: Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) observations reports. Agendas, minutes and sign-in sheets of all meetings will be maintained in the general office. 5c: February 2019 Mid-Point Progress Assessments: Math School Baseline and Mid-Term Tests with Findings and Trends reports 6th Grade: Progress monitoring report from Fall math assessment to Winter mid-term math assessment: Total Point Increase on average (6th grade): 8.9 points Total percent increase on average (6th grade): 73.1% per student Findings: As we were analyzing the data from Fall math assessment to Winter math assessment, we noticed that the majority of our students showed improvement. For the 6th graders, on average they gained 8.9 points per student. We also calculated the percent increase to be 73.1% per student. The students showed a significant percent increase from the initial assessment to the winter assessment in part because their prior knowledge of the 6th grade content tested was very limited. Another important finding was that our students as a whole, struggled with the constructive response questions. One of the reasons may be in part to their limited knowledge of language literacy. Next Steps: We will continue to include math vocabulary words in our daily lessons and will review selected basic math concepts. Practicing the above two strategies should eventually lead them to become more proficient in solving real-world mathematical problems. We will also include constructive response type problems in our daily lessons which would re-inforce their writing skills, and comprehension of solving real-life word problems. 7th Grade: Progress monitoring report from Fall math assessment to Winter mid-term math assessment: Total Point Increase on average (7th grade): 9.3 points Total percent increase on average (7th grade): 121% Findings: As we were analyzing the data from Fall math assessment to Winter math assessment, we noticed that the majority of our students showed improvement. For the 7th graders, on average they gained 9.3 points per student. 2018-19 CEP 37  We also calculated the percent increase to be 121% per student. The students showed a significant percent increase from the initial assessment to the winter assessment in part because their prior knowledge of the 7th grade content tested was very limited. Another important finding was that our students as a whole, struggled with the constructive response questions. One of the reasons may be in part to their limited knowledge of language literacy. Next Steps: We will continue to include math vocabulary words in our daily lessons and will review selected basic math concepts. Practicing the above two strategies should eventually lead them to become more proficient in solving real-world mathematical problems. We will also include constructive response type problems in our daily lessons which would re-inforce their writing skills, and comprehension of solving real-life word problems. 8th Grade: Progress monitoring report from Fall math assessment to Winter mid-term math assessment: Total Point Increase on average (8th grade): 8.2 points Total percent increase on average (8th grade): 59.6% Progress Monitoring Report Findings: As we were analyzing the data from Fall math assessment to Winter math assessment, we noticed that the majority of our students showed improvement. For the 8th graders, on average they gained 8.2 points per student. We also calculated the percent increase to be 59.6% per student. The students showed a significant percent increase from the initial assessment to the winter assessment in part because their prior knowledge of the 8th grade content tested was very limited. Another important finding was that our students as a whole, struggled with the constructive response questions. One of the reasons may be in part to their limited knowledge of language literacy. Next Steps: We will continue to include math vocabulary words in our daily lessons and will review selected basic math concepts. Practicing the above two strategies should eventually lead them to become more proficient in solving real-world mathematical problems. We will also include constructive response type problems in our daily lessons which would re-inforce their writing skills, and comprehension of solving real-life word problems. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths: Based on the data from the 2017-18 NYC School Quality Guide, the school obtained an overall score of 4.80 for Effective School Leadership. This is a +1.22 compared to both district average and city average. Specifically the data demonstrated positive responses on the following measures: Inclusive Leadership, Instructional Leadership, Program Coherence and Teacher Influence. Data from the 2017-18 overall ADVANCE MOTP exhibited 27% of teachers are HE and 52% are E in Domain 3, component 3c. 64% of the teachers are HE and 24% are E in Domain 3 component 3d. Analysis of ADVANCE indicated teachers are implementing instructional strategies introduced through professional development (In-house, District and Citywide) and also support from an ELL/Literacy Specialist from the Queens North Field Support Center. Teacher team leaders reemphasized these high expectations in their vertical and horizontal weekly meetings. The school leader in conjunction with the Inquiry team analyzed MOTP Overall Ratings and determined the areas of strength and areas for growth on specific components from the Danielson Framework (1a, 1e, 3b, 3c and 3d). All teacher teams were required to research in depth these specific components from the Danielson Framework rubric and submit professional learning topics that they would present during the school year. Priority Needs and Areas of Focus: Specifically, findings from the 2016-2017 Advance MOTP indicated that 27% of the teachers were rated Highly Effective, 52% were rated Effective and 20% were rated Developing on Component 3c (Student Engagement). Planning and teaching practices need to reflect the use of ongoing instructional techniques to promote student engagement (3c) and providing a more student-centered environment. Student tasks are reflecting teacher guided tasks with practice activities. In most classrooms visited, there is a need to increase students in extended learning by having students apply concepts learned (DOK Level 4). Next Steps: The school leader in conjunction with the school cabinet team and with members of the Professional Development Committee developed a school year calendar with professional learning topics in order to provide support to all teachers. On Monday afternoons, we will have an Instructional Lead from the district provide five sessions of professional learning on using formative assessment’ and how to incorporate extended learning in the classroom. A schedule for horizontal and vertical teacher team meetings has also been created to focus on planning and preparation of units with extended learning activities as a culminating task for the lesson/unit. In order to bring the school to the next level, instructional adjustments will be made to academic tasks to further promote student-centered learning. The ENL teachers will meet with content area teachers in vertical meetings once a week to further promote academic vocabulary acquisition and learning tasks for student discourse. Teacher leaders will attend professional development provided by NYC DOE, District Field Support Center and turn-key their learning to their teams. Teachers will participate in professional learning teams and conduct in class-visitations to share best practices and reflect on how their learning can impact increased student learning. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement a series of professional learning communities and targeted professional development in the area of formative assessment/tasks to promote student extended learning in the classroom; as evidenced by a 10% performance increase in Danielson's component 3c and 3d. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Inquiry/Teacher team leaders, ENL Teachers School Based Team School Systems and Professional Development: The school vision Teachers and school staff must support student learning by designing a school-wide professional development calendar for the school year and a structured school schedule for horizontal and vertical teacher teams to analyze and meet all students' needs. -Through the observation cycle and the use of the Danielson Framework, the school cabinet team will conduct two professional developments with a focus on - the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching rubric (3c & 3d). - Initial Planning Conferences with teachers to analyze overall teacher ratings and identify strengths and areas for growth in order to provide targeted feedback and support on Domain 1 Planning and Preparation (1e) and Domain 3 Instruction (3c and (3d). Evidence in teacher teams and classrooms should include but not be limited to: Professional development plan that is developed with and by teachers; is driven by MOTP data; aligns all activities with the school instructional focus and Danielson’s Framework domains and components; combines all resources; includes ongoing assessment of student learning; and evaluates effectiveness of lesson instructional adjustments and criterion for academic learning tasks/activities. -Distributed leadership among teacher teams will facilitate inter-visitations between teachers both within the school and with other schools serving ELLs students to observe student-centered learning and formative assessments. Instructional Strategies to Address the Needs of All Students: Teachers -Continue to support a teacher team system to enhance instruction in all content areas to develop lessons/units with September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Inquiry/Teacher team leaders 2018-19 CEP 41  clear high quality assessment supports and enrichment activities for vocabulary and literacy. -Incorporate academic tasks with evidence of multiple entry points (scaffolds, tiered activities, leveled questions, high-order questions and discussions to increase student critical thinking skills, Exit Slips, student self-assessments with task rubric/checklist for equal access to content. -Implement instructional strategies to promote student engagement: Accountable talk structure, graphic organizers, Think-Pair-Share, Jigsaw, Turn & Talk, real-life scenarios, writing prompts that encourage the use of academic vocabulary and group presentations. -Extension activities with criteria rubrics to promote higher performing students in the content area. - The School leader, ENL teachers and Instructional Lead from QNFSC will work together to align assessment tasks to curriculum to address students’ performance and understanding of skills. -The School Leader and School Cabinet Inquiry Team will enhance school support system by promoting a team effort: “Team Work makes the Dream Work” for all school staff to be engaged in professional responsibilities: Danielson Framework Component (4e). -Teacher participation in Professional Development during the 2018-19 school year sponsored by QNFSC and DELLS. -Teacher leaders will expand Professional Learning Communities to include all teachers in order to share best practices to specific content area teacher teams. Family Engagement -Create a climate of safety and trusting relationships between families and the school by being transparent. -A school grade policy and criteria for evaluation will be provided to all parents at the beginning of the school year. Teachers and Students September 2018- June 2019 Principal, ENL Teachers, QNFSC Instructional Lead All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, School Inquiry Team, ENL Teachers -All subject teachers will provide families with a course syllabus during ‘Sneak Peek’ and ‘Meet the Teacher-Curriculum Night’. Parents -Parents will have access to Jupiter Ed so they can remain abreast of their child’s performance in each class. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, 2018-19 CEP 42 Parent Coordinator School Mental Health Consultant -Teachers and staff will provide one to one conferences during Tuesdays Parent Engagement time. -Parents will also receive quarterly Student Progress Reports (SPR) as a means of communication of student achievement. -A schedule of workshops/seminars will be provided to all parents and families for the 2018-19 school year. -Orientation meetings will be provided for 8th grade parents on the high school application process. -Parents of 7th graders will be encouraged to participate in the CA4A college tours. -Guidance Counselor will work in conjunction with School Mental Health consultant to offer workshops and outside resources that will help parents/students adjust to acclimating to all the changes that come with immigrating to a new country. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Promoting Parent Engagement for School Improvement:  Teachers and staff will advise parents in understanding the school grade policy and criteria for evaluation in subjects.  The parent coordinator will train parents on how to monitor student learning at home and how to navigate the School Net.  Teachers and staff will provide support to parents and families who are under-represented in the school system by offering one to one conferences during Tuesdays Parent Engagement time. There is an open door policy for parents to come at any time during the week to speak to school staff.  Outreach to parents will also include Student Progress Reports as a mean of communication.  School provide parents with specific workshops to help them understand how to create a positive and productive learning environment at home.  Parents will be invited into the classrooms to partake in the learning process and understand the school's high expectations.  The guidance counselor will work with parents to help them navigate the school system and facilitate conferences between parents and students to provide socio-emotional support.  Guidance Counselor will work in conjunction with School Mental Health consultant to obtain workshops and outside resources that will help parents/students adjust to adjusting to all the changes that come with immigrating to a new country.  Timeline and Key Personnel: September 2018- June 2019, Principal, Teachers, School staff, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, School Mental Health Consultant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 43  Tax Levy will be used for resources and workshops for teachers and staff: Monday professional development time, Administrative Periods (C6) for Team meetings and workshops. Tax Levy and Title I will provide per session for teacher coverage to engage teachers in professional development opportunities throughout the city. Title I will be used for parent engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school leader will generate data reports from the ADVANCE teacher evaluation system to analyze teacher performance on specific Danielson Components 3c and 3d. The Rating Distribution by Evaluator and Domain Component Tool will generate the percentage of teachers with Highly Effective and Effective ratings on these components. This data will serve as evidence of mid-point teacher performance as it relate to student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance: The Rating Distribution by Evaluator and Domain Component Tool , Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) observations with feedback, Professional development calendar, PD agendas and sign-in sheets, school team meetings agendas, minutes and sign-in sheets. 5c: Mid-Point Progress- Based on current informal observations According to the ADVANCE Rating Distribution, on component 3c: 82.3% of teachers obtained an Effective rating, 11.7% obtained a Highly Effective rating and 5.8% obtained a Developing Rating. On component 3d; 76.4% obtained an Effective rating, 17.6% obtained a Highly Effective and 5.8 obtained a Developing rating. Teacher observations and feedback include evidence based on student centered activities (Collaborative Strategic Reading method, Think Pair Share, real world scenarios group presentations. Evidence of student learning also include academic tasks with evidence of multiple entry points (scaffolds, tiered activities, leveled questions, high-order questions and discussions to increase student critical thinking skills and student self-assessments with task rubric/checklist for equal access to content. Teacher teams has participated in specific professional development in literacy, math, Data Driven Instruction, Transforming Communities through Multilingualism: Equity and Access in Bilingual Programs, Social Studies Passport, Civics for All and Diversity and Equity In-House discussions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide and the School Survey measures: ‘Outreach to Parents’ a 97% of parents and families responded positively. This resulted in a score of 4.40 with a +7% compared to district average and a +5% compared to city average. 100% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 99% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. Priority Needs and Area of Focus: Priority Needs: Focus will be on Framework Element: Supportive Environment – Parent Involvement The 2017-2018 School Survey data revealed the following data and needs: For the NYC School Survey Measure: Parent Involvement in School, there was an 82% of parents/families that responded positively to NYC School Survey. This was a score of 3.00. with a +0% increase compared to the district average and a -3% compared to city-average schools. Specifically the data revealed: a. 53% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) b. 86% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b) c. 87% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. (Q6a) The school will continue to enhance a culture where students and families feel safe, and are supported by the school community to meet high expectations. We need to implement more flexibility for parent involvement so they can be more proactive in their child’s learning. We want our students to be cognizant that their families are involved in their education process and that parents and families will also serve as a guide while they are on the path to college. All parents/families should be encouraged to take responsibility for their child’s learning in order to prepare them with the skills necessary in the 21st Century. This entails the students being fully engaged in the learning process. Therefore, parents and families need to take an initiative in order to increase their participation in their child’s education as well as be a part of the school community. I.S. 235 will continue to create a school culture that connects all families to the school and each other through meaningful engagement and community building. There is a need to continue improvements for more parent involvement to help engage and support students and other families. The school will expand parent-family resources for family engagement by promoting more activities: Parent volunteers and family members for language translators 2018-19 CEP 45  as needed, parents leading or co-leading activities and fundraising for school events and community networking to promote the school. The school will also provide a school mental health consultant who will identify social and emotional resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in positive responses on parent involvement from 82% to 85% as measured by the results on the 2018-19 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 46 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT and PA members, Guidance Counselor, School Mental Health Consultant Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). I.S. 235 staff will utilize multiple modes of communication to accommodate all parents and stakeholders: - Parent Engagement Tuesdays and by appointment during the week. - September 2018 Meet the Teacher- Curriculum School Night -Translated school notices -Phone and memo logs of parent communication -Parent Engagement Events calendar -Monthly school calendar and newsletter -Open door policy for parents to visit the school -Conduct two student-led conferences per year (November 2018 and January 2019) -High School Preparation orientation for parents/families of 8th graders in November 2018 -Team -Up Tuesday, partnership with NYPD Precinct 114 - Community based resources to increase family, school and community engagement. I.S. 235Q Arts liaison and P.A. will connect with a minimum of two community based organizations to promote increased parental involvement and access to school related events. Parents September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Arts Liaison, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 47   School wide showcase of student work and arts presentation, Spring 2019, including artists-in-residence from community based organizations: City Lore, Center for Integration of Arts Parent Coordinator will engage parents by celebrating cultural diversity through events ‘Holiday Show, Spring Concert and International Night planned by a cultural committee made up of parents and teachers. A workshop calendar provided by different community based organizations to conduct specific evening workshops for parents: Jacob Riis Neighborhood Settlement-Immigrant Services Program: NY Rise -Know Your Rights; DOE School Mental Health: Self-Care and Gang Awareness; Precinct 114: Cyber-bullying; and LGBTQ, from HMI Agency. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Mental Health Consultant The SLT, Parent Coordinator and P.A. will create an In-house survey to reflect areas of interests/needs of parents and families. Parents September 2018-June 2019 SLT, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYC Health Family and Child Health- School Mental Health Consultant, Elmcor Youth and Adult Activities City Lore, Center for Integration of Arts Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement time each week, – Title I will also provide funds for parent workshops provided by facilitators. Title I and Tax Levy will provide funds for educational resources for parent ENL classes, P.A. meetings and Translation & Interpretation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 48  Mid-Point Benchmark: By February 2019, the school will increase collaborative partnership with parents/guardians and community organizations, as measured by a 3% increase in parents who participate in school events, workshops/seminars, and PA meetings as evidenced by parent attendance sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School events, P.A. meetings, workshops, student-led conferences and parent-student-teachers conferences attendance sign-in sheets with agendas 5c: Mid -Point Progress report 24% of parents attended Meet The Teacher Night and Title I Orientation in September. 20% of parents attended the annual holiday show in December. 25% of parents log regularly onto Jupiter ED to monitor student progress. 41% of parents attended the first formal parent teacher conferences in November. As of January 2019, 12% of parents have participated in 5 monthly workshops and also in Diversity and Equity discussions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Services are provided in whole /small group. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the school day and after school (Wednesday-Thursday-Friday) and on Saturdays. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest third population: Spring 2018 NYS ELA below level 3 Spring 2018 NYSESLAT item analysis Classroom performance data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Teacher Teams identified returning students as the “Lowest Third Population”, Integrated ENL and ELA planning for instructional Lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Title III and Title III Immigrant program Web-based Programs : - Performance Series-ELA -Brain Pop/ Read Theory Textbooks/ Supplements : - Wordly Wise 3000 workbooks -VOCABULARY LINKS FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT - READY NEW YORK CCLS – ENGLISH 2018-19 CEP 50 Services are provided in whole /small group. Services are provided during the school day and after school (Wednesday-Thursday-Friday) and on Saturdays. Mathematics LANGUAGE ARTS PRACTICE BOOKS -Finish Line-Reading and Writing Journals Teacher Teams identified returning students as the “Lowest Third Population”, Math and Literacy planning for instruction, Lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Lowest third population: Lowest third population: Spring 2018 NYS Math below level 3 Spring 2018 NYSESLAT item analysis Classroom performance data Title III and Title III Immigrant program Web-based Programs : - Performance Series-Math Textbooks/ Supplements : -GLENCOE CCSS MATH TEXTBOOKS Support: Go Math: School based created curriculum lessons aligned to CCLS in English and Spanish -READY NEW YORK CCLS – Math PRACTICE BOOKS -Math Journals -Academic Vocabulary wall 2018-19 CEP 51  Science Classroom performance data Science and Literacy planning for instruction, Services are provided in whole /small group. Pre & Mid unit Science assessments Portfolio analysis Lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. 2018 NYSESLAT item analysis reports. Title III and Title III Immigrant program Services are provided during the school day and after school (Wednesday-Thursday-Friday) and on Saturdays. Social Studies Classroom performance data Pre, Mid & Post unit assessments for 6th grade Portfolio analysis MOSL performance writing tasks rubrics for grades 7 and 8. 2018 NYSESLAT item analysis At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students at risk: social behavioral, emotional, academic needs. Teacher concerns Parent concerns Textbooks/ Supplements : - Pearson ElevateScience in English and Spanish -Scientific Inquiry Notebooks -Oxford Illustrated Science Dictionaries Passport Units for Social Studies and Literacy planning including writing process for instruction. iLessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Title III and Title III Immigrant program. Social Studies Journals The school guidance Counselor and social worker work on addressing study skills, stress/anger management, relaxation techniques, peer Services are provided in whole /small group. Services are provided during the school day and after school (Wednesday-Thursday-Friday) and on Saturdays. Services are provided in small groups and individual. Services are provided during the school day and on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP 52  counseling, grief management - Assemblies: Anti-Bullying Program Anti-Cyber Bullying program Blue Ribbon Week – anti-drug program, Penny Harvest, Food Drive ElmcoreStudent and Adult Activities will provide 14 lessons on socio-emotional awareness. 2018-19 CEP 53  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) I.S. 235Q is a school for newly arrived immigrants. The number of Students in Temporary Housing for the school year 2017-2018 is 1. However the number of students living in relatives’ homes is 67. Combining these two numbers for a total number of 68 students, 48.92 percent of our students are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP 54  STH funds will be utilized for basic/emergency supplies (such as school books, personal hygiene items, school supplies, school uniforms). Yellow bus services provided to students in grades 6-7 whenever an appropriate route exists to provide such service (Chancellor’s Regulation A-780). For students not receiving busing, a full-fare MetroCard should be provided by the school. Title I Set-Aside funds will be used to support parent involvement in schools. Title I Academic programs and educational support services, including per session academic intervention (Afterschool and Saturday sessions) including per session counseling. Referrals of students to medical, dental, mental and other health services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers in the school are highly qualified. However, because of constraints in the school budget, one teacher is teaching Math as part of his schedule. He has been rated as an Effective teacher overall. He does attend workshops and is in the process of becoming highly qualified. We provide our new teachers with experienced buddy teachers and have them attend professional learning at the QNFSC and DELLS. New teachers also participate in content specific teacher teams and with the school principal in order to assist them in teaching practices, curriculum planning and assessments. The school leader in conjunction with the school cabinet team also support all teachers by designing a school-wide professional development calendar for the school year and a structured school schedule for horizontal and vertical teacher teams to address all teachers' needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High levels of staff performance are evident as certified and qualified staff engages in ongoing professional development and work in teams to provide rigorous, relevant and engaging learning opportunities or other types of support for all students to meet the CCSS. The Principal will attend monthly District meetings. Weekly Professional Development will be provided to all teachers on Monday afternoons to reflect and improve on teacher learning. Provide the opportunity to receive intensive, sustained, and research‐based professional development both in content and pedagogy in all core subject areas for all 6th-8th grade teachers i.e. The Six Elements of the Capacity Framework, Differentiated Instruction: Scaffolding, School Culture, Integrated ESL/ELA Training, Diversity in the Classroom, English Language Acquisition for ELLs, Cross Curricular Planning, Technology Integration, Classroom Instruction that Works, 21st Century Skills, Unit Plans, Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Depth of Knowledge 'DOK', etc. Teachers will participate in professional development sponsored by Center for Integration Teacher Education, DELLS, and the Queens District 30 Borough Field Support Center (QNBFSC) . The principal will attend professional development with a focus on building teacher leadership, teacher effectiveness, teacher retention, teacher evaluation, teacher support, and teacher empowerment in their workshop presentations. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The School Cabinet/Inquiry team and Data Specialist will attend Central and Borough Field Support Center (QNBFSC) Professional Development in order to stay informed/up to date of its role in the Advance Evaluation System. Teachers continue to take an active role in making determinations to monitor student progress through data driven instruction. For example in social studies and science, teacher leaders work collaboratively to develop pre-, and mid- term assessments and work with the principal to select the most appropriate assessments. Teachers are provided with common planning time, vertically, in grades 6-8 to discuss measures of student learning and assessment tools available. During this school year, we have developed a PD & Cabinet/Inquiry committee to critically think about assessment measures and develop rigorous instructional practices that support student 2018-19 CEP 57  achievement. This Inquiry team makes decisions regarding assessments as they relate to Core Subject teams in grades 6-8. Analyze test scores (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, NYC Performance Tasks for 7/8 Social Studies, NYS Science 8th grade, ELL Baselines) with the principal and help provide relevant professional development and support for schools from instructional leaders and QNBFSC curriculum specialists and principal facilitators. All teachers use several appropriate measures such as placement tests, Pre- and Mid-Point assessments, predicative assessments and teacher assessments, baseline and benchmark. Teachers provide scaffolding techniques and questioning strategies to accelerate student learning. Use of academic vocabulary will be evident in the classroom. The Testing Coordinator, data specialist and the School Inquiry team will meet to review data from formative assessments. Parents of students will also be notified of scores. Students will be identified according to their performance scores on the NYSESLAT and State Math assessments as high risk, or low risk as well as teacher observations. The lowest third population of returning 7th and 8th grade students’ scores will also be considered when assessing students’ needs for additional intervention support. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4a, 4b, Part 3 of Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 60,539.00 X 5a, 5b, 5d, 5e 2018-19 CEP 58  Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 16,974.00 0 1,080,203 0 X 0 X 0 4a, 4b, Part 3 of 5a, 5b, Section 6 0 4a, 4b, Part 3 of 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Section 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 59   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 60  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, I.S.235, Academy for New Americans, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. I.S.235’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision- making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Advisory Council, as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 2018-19 CEP 61  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Poliza Para la Participación de los Padres - Título I Los estudios recientes de la educacion presentan una relacion positiva entre la involucracion efectiva de los padres y el exito academico del estudiante. El objetivo general de esta poliza es el desarrollar un programa de participacion de padres que garantice una alianza efectiva entre padres y la comunidad academica en nuestra escuela. Por lo tanto, la escuela I.S. 235, Academia Para Nuevos Americanos, (de conformidad con la Seccion 1118 del titulo I, Parte A de la Ley “ESSA" se compromete en crear y e incorporar una poliza que incluya programas, actividades y procedimientos con miras a la participacion de padres dentro de la escuela y asi fortalecer la conexion entre el apoyo de logro academico de los estudiantes y sus familias. La poliza de IS 235 esta disenada para mantener informados a los padres sobre su participacion activa en la planificacion y en la toma de decisions para ayudar en la educacion de sus ninos. Se motivan a los padres a ser aliados en la educacion de sus ninos mediante un entrenamiento voluntario para ser miembros de nuestra comunidad escolar y ser participantes activos en el Equipo de Liderazgo Escolar, la Asociacion de Padres, y en el Consejo Asesor de Padres Titulo I. La poliza de participacion de los padres en I.S. 235 fue disenada bajo un cuidadoso estudio de las necesidades de todos los padres o tutores. Nuestra comunidad escolar conducira una evaluacion annual con los padres de Titulo I sobre el contenido y la eficacia de esta poliza. Esta evaluacion se ejercera a traves de encuestas y preguntas de punto de vista. con el fin de mejorar la calidad academica en la escuela. Los resultados se analizaran y seran utilizados para disenar estrategias que satisfagan y enriquezca eficazmente las necesidades de los padres y el programa del Titulo I. Toda esta informacion sera disponible en la escuela. En el transcurso del desarrollo de la Poliza Para la Participación de los Padres, los padres de estudiantes en Titulo I, como tambien los padres que miembros del Equipo de Liderazgo, fueron consultados para la formacion de esta poliza. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students I.S.235, Academy for New Americans will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 62  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- I.S. 235 facilitara e implementara las normas del Titulo I para apoyar la participacion de los padres atraves de:  La facilitacion de materiales y entrenamiento que pueda ayudar a padres a trabajar con sus ninos a que mejoren su nivel academico (ej: literacia, matematicas, y el uso de tecnologia)  Proveer a los padres con la informacion y el entrenamiento necesario para ser involucrados de manera efectiva en la planificacion y toma decisiones en relacion a la educacion de sus ninos.  Apoyar una alianza del hogar y la escuela que sea solidaria y efectiva, asi los padres pueden apoyar y supervisar el progreso academico de los hijos.  Ofrecer ayuda a los padres en la comprension de los sistemas de evaluaciones educativas en la ciudad y en el  estado, como tambien entender las normas educacionales a nivel federal. Facilitar informacion en diferentes idiomas (para que los padres puedan entender) sobre la escuela y los programas para los padres que incluya las reuniones, y otras actividades.  Proporcionar oportunidades de desarrollo professional para el personal de la escuela con la ayuda de los padres para asi mejorar el alcance en la escuela, las destrezas de comunicacion, y la capacidad cultural con el fin de fortalecer los vinculos entre los padres y otros miembros de la comunidad escolar. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, I.S. 235 will: Parental Involvement and School Quality  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families.  The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 63    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-  Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events; continuing to add resources to the already established Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their  children’s progress; creating a monthly school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  providing each student with a school planner so that parents can monitor daily homework assignments  providing parents a calendar of mandated assessments and dates  providing parents with a syllabus in each content -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- La escuela I.S. 235 se compromete en enriquecer y mejorar la participacion de padres y la calidad academica de la escuela haciendo lo siguiente:   Involucrar activamente a los padres en la planificacion, revision, y evaluacionde la efectividad del programa de Titulo I en la escuela como se senala en el Plan Intensivo Educacional de la escuela incluido en esta poliza y tambien en el Convenio de Padres y Escuela. Incluir a los padres en discusiones y decisiones sobre el uso de fondos del Titulo I dirigidos a promover mas la participacion de padres en literacia para la familia y destrezas para la crianza de los hijos.  Afirmar que los fondos Titulo I asignados para la participacion de los padres sean utilizados para llevar a cabo actividades y estrategias como provisto en la Poliza De Participacion De Padres y en el Convenio de Padres y Escuela.  Apoyar los comites a nivel escolar a que tambien incluyan padres como miembros de Equipo de Liderazgo, Asociacion de Padres, y Consejo Asesor de Padres Titulo I. Estos comites tambien ayudaran a padres en uso de technologia, talleres de desarrollo professional, y destrezas de liderazgo.  Mantener un(a) coordinadora de padres (o personal de la facultad) que sea un enlace de comunicacion entre la escuela y las familias. El Coordinador de Padres ( o personal asignado) ofrecera talleres a los padres relacionados a las necesidades de los padres y de los ninos que asisten en nuestra escuela. Tambien 2018-19 CEP 64   garantizara que la escuela demuestre un ambiente acogedor y de bienvenida a los padres. El/La coordinadora de padres mantendra un registro de eventos y actividades planificados para cada mes y presentara un informe oficial ante la Oficina Central Para Representacion Y Participacion De La Familia (OFEA). Llevar a cabo talleres para padres con temas que incluya: Destrezas para la crianza de los hijos, comprension de la responsabilidad educativa, las espectativas de los curriculos y evaluaciones al nivel del grado, literacia, acceso a los servicios de apoyo y la comunidad, y talleres de entrenamiento en el uso de la tecnologia para aumentar la capacidad de los padres en ayudar a los hijos en su hogar.  Proporcionar oportunidades a los padres para ayudarles a entender mejor el Sistema de Responsabilidad  Estatal “ESSA”, los niveles de aptitud estudiantil, la Tarjeta De Informe De La Escuela, el Informe Annual Del Rendimiento De La Escuela, Informes Sobre La Revision De La Calidad Escolar, y El Informe Sobre La Calidad Del Ambiente De Aprendizaje En La Escuela. Ser anfitrion de la preceptiva Reunion Anual De Padres -Titulo I antes o despues del 1ero de diciembre del ano escolar. Asesorar a los padres de los ninos participantes en el programa Titulo I, conocer sus derechos para participar en el programa, y comprender los requisitos de participación de padres según Título I, Parte A, del Artículo 1118, y tambien otros articulos pertinentes bajo la ley ESSA.  Preparar calendarios que incluya horarios flexibles en la manana o en las tardes para realizar reuniones, compartir informacion sobre el programa educativo de la escuela como tambien explicar las iniciativas del canciller, y permitir a los padres que compartan sus sugerencias.  Programar reuniones adicionales de padres: por ejemplo: reuniones trimestrales con horarios flexibles; en la manana o en la tarde, para compartir informacion sobre el programa educativo y tambien las iniciativas del canciller. Se les permitiran a los padres a contribuir con sugerencias.  Traducir todo documento que sea importante para la escuela y proveer cuando sea necesario, servicios de  interpretacion en las reuniones y otros eventos. Llevar acabo el evento annual de la Feria de Titulo I para los Padres donde se les ofrece presentaciones formales y talleres que traten sobre las necesidades academicas del estudiante y como los padres pueden ayudar. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-  Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events; continuing to add resources to the already established Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their  children’s progress; creating a monthly school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  providing each student with a school planner so that parents can monitor daily homework assignments  providing parents a calendar of mandated assessments and dates  providing parents with a syllabus in each content 2018-19 CEP 65  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- La escuela I.S. 235 favorecera aun mas la participacion de los padres en la escuela: Llevando a cabo la Conferencia Annual del Curriculo Para Padres Titulo I   Auspiciando actividades y eventos educativos para la familia durante la Semana de Escuela Abierta y durante todo el ano escolar.  Enfatizando la importancia de la participacion de padres en el Equipo de Liderazgo, La Asociacion De Padres y El Consejo Asesor De Padres Titulo I  Apoyando el auspicio de actividades para el Dia Del Distrito Familiar “OFEA”  Mejorando el Centro De Recursos Para Los Padres, o la biblioteca, como tambien materiales de instruccion para los padres.  Auspiciando eventos que apoyen a padres o encargados, abuelos, y padres adoptivos que afirman el liderazgo hacia la educacion de sus hijos.  Motivando a mas padres a llegar a ser voluntarios entrenados en la escuela.  Proporcionando a los padres informes por medio verbal y escrito para asi mantenerlos informados sobre el progreso academico de sus hijos.  Desarrollando y distribuyendo boletines informativos de la escuela o publicar una red disenada para mantener a los padres informados sobre las actividades escolares y el progreso academico del estudiante.  Proporcionando agendas escolares para promover la comunicacion por escrita entre el maestro y el hogar en un formato practico y de ser possible en diferentes lenguajes para que los padres puedan entender. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Academy for New Americans, I.S. 235 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- CONVENIO DE ESCUELA Y PADRES La escuela I.S. 235Q, (en cumplimiento con el Articulo 1118 del Titulo I, Parte A de la Ley ESSA, esta realizando el Convenio de Escuela y Padres para fortalecer la conexion y el apoyo del exito academico estudiantil entre la escuela y las familias. El personal de la escuela I.S. 235 y los padres de los estudiantes que participan en actividades y programas financiados por el Titulo I, aceptan que éste Conveno emboza como los padres, el personal de la escuela, y los estudiantes compartiran la responsabilidad para el mejor logro academico y tambien los medios para poder establecer una union de Padres y Escuela que pueda asegurar que todos los ninos tengan exito en las evaluaciones y las normas estatales. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 66  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Se proveera un curriculo e instruccion de alta calidad que sean consistentes con las Normas del Estado para asi ayudar a los ninos participantes a cumplir con las evaluaciones y normas del estado mediante:  el uso eficaz del tiempo en el aprendizaje academico  el respetar las diferencias culturales, raciales y de ethnicas;   el facilitar una instruccion de alta calidad en todas las materias de clases;  el proveer instruccion a traves de maestros altamente calificados y de no ser asi, notificar a los padres como la implementacion de un curriculo asociado a las Normas del Estado; lo requiere la Ley ESSA. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Se apoyaran las relaciones entre Escuela y Hogar y se mejorara la comunicacion mediante: 2018-19 CEP 67   conferencias entre padres y maestros cada semester para discutir el progreso academico individual de estudiantes; La Reunion Anual de Padres Titulo I (antes de 1ero de diciembre del ano escolar) para los padres de los estudiantes participantes en el programa Titulo I, donde se les informaran sobre sus derechos a conocer los programas disponibles que son financiados por el estado;  organizacion de reuniones adicionales con horarios flexibles (ej: en la manana, en la noche) y proveer (de haber fondos) transportacion, cuido de ninos o visitas al hogar para aquellos padres que no puedan asistir a reuniones regulares;  el respeto de los derechos de familias con limitaciones en ingles ofreciendoles documentos traducidos y  servicios de interpretes para asi asegurar su participacion en la educacion de su ninos; informacion relacionada a la escuela, programas de padres, reuniones y otras actividades son enviadas a padres de ninos participantes en un formato de lenguaje simple que los padres puedan comprender;  participacion de los padres en el proceso de planificacion para revisar, evaluar y mejorar el programa Titulo I y  la Poliza de Participacion de Padres y el Convenio de Escuela y Padres; informacion y datos actualizados sobre perfiles de rendimiento academico y resultados de evaluaciones a nivel individual, como tambien otra informacion pertinente de la escuela; el asegurar que la Poliza de Participacion de Padres y el Convenio de Escuela y Padres sean distribuidos y discutidos con padres cada ano; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ El proveer a los padres con acceso al personal escolar mediante:  personal que tenga acceso a servicios de interpretacion que les ayuden a comunicarse mejor con padres con limitaciones en ingles;  notificacion a los padres sobre los procedimientos para planificar una cita con maestros de sus ninos u otro personal escolar;  proveer a los padres con oportunidades de recibir entrenamiento para ser voluntario y que pueda participar en la clase de su nino o que pueda observar las actividades de clases;  planificacion de actividades para padres durante el ano escolar (por ejemplo, La Semana de Escuelas Abiertas). Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 68     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Se les dara apoyo general a los padres mediante:       creacion de una comunidad escolar segura, comprensiva y efectiva para losestudiantes y un ambiente respetuoso y hospitalario para padres y para tutores; ayuda a padres en poder entender normas y evaluaciones academicas como tambien proveer ayuda en supervision del progreso de su nino a traves de talleres (horarios seran organizados para que la mayoria de padres puedan asistir); compartir y comunicar las mejores practicas en la escuela para asi desarrollar una comunicacion y colaboracion efectiva con todos los miembros de la comunidad escolar; apoyar las actividades para la involucracion de los padres y asegurar que los fondos de Titulo I asignados a la participacion de los padres, sean utilizados para implementar actividades como asi se describe en este Convenio y en la Poliza de Participacion de Padres; asesorar a los padres sobre sus derechos para presentar una demanda segun el acuerdo del Departamentode Procedimientos de Demandas Generales y consistente con el Requisito Titulo I para la Ley de Educacion Elemental Y Secundaria, por sus siglas en ingles, (ESSA) y programas de Titulo I; As Parent/Guardian, I agree to: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 69   communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Yo me comprometo a: comunicarme con el/la maestro/a de mi hijo/a acerca de las necesidades   educacionales y me mantendre informado/a sobre su educacion a traves de leer y    participar en el desarrollo, implementacion, evaluacion y revision de la Poliza de La Participacion de Padres, y responder todas las correspondencias de la escuela o el distrito escolar; responder las encuestas, questionarios, y notificaciones cuando se exijan; este Convenio;  participar en entrenamientos ofrecidos por la escuela, distritos, y/o el Departamento de Educacion del Estado para aprender mas sobre estrategias de aprendizaje y ensenanza cuando sea possible; ser miembro de la Asociacion de Padres de la escuela o La Asociacion de Padres y Maestros para ayudar en grupos de asesoria cuando sea possible (ejemplo: Consejo Asesor de Titulo I de la escuela/distrito, Equipo de Liderazgo del Distrito/Escuela); compartir la responsabilidad para el mejorar el logro academico de mi hijo/a. Supervisar la asistencia de mi hijo/a y tener la certeza de que mi hijo/a llega a    tiempo a la escuela como tambien seguir los procedimientos apropiados para informar a la escuela cuando mi hijo/a estara ausente;  Asegurar que mi hijo/a tenga un horario para acostarse a descansar y asi llegar en descansado a la escuela;  Revisar y ayudar a mi hijo/a a completar tareas, cuando sea necesario;   Establecer limites en el tiempo que mi hijo/a dedica a la television, computadoras, y/o juegos de videos;  Promover positivamente el uso del tiempo para actividades extracurriculares como: oportunidades de Leer a mi hijo/a y/o dialogar sobre lo que esta leyendo cada dia (un minimo de 15 minutos); aprendizaje despues del horario regular de la escuela, clubes, deportes, juegos de equipos, y/o tiempo de calidad de familia; Ser voluntario en la escuela de mi hijo/a o ayudar desde mi casa si el tiempo lo permite;   Participar, de manera apropiada, en las desiciones en relacion a la educacion de mi hijo/a. III. Student Responsibilities  attend school regularly and arrive on time; 2018-19 CEP 70       complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Seguir los reglamentos de la escuela y ser responsible por mis acciones  Asistir a la escuela regularmente y llegar a tiempo;  Completar las tareas y entregar todas las asignaciones a tiempo;   Respetarme a mi mismo, otras personas, y propiedad;  Tratar de resolver conflictos o desacuerdos de manera pacifica;  Siempre hacer lo maximo para aprender 2018-19 CEP 71  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S 235, Academy for New Americans is a transitional (open enrollment), comprehensive one-year school for newcomer students. Title III funds will assist our school in providing supplemental instruction in English as a Second Language, mathematics and science during an after-school program. The afterschool program will be intended to begin on October 17th 2018 and will be expected to end May 2nd 2019. The program will be scheduled for implementation of three days per week and 3 teachers for a duration of 20 weeks. The program schedule for students will run Wednesdays and Fridays from 2:30PM to 4:30pm. The program will serve approximately 60 students. There will be 2 ENL and 1 Content/Bilingual teachers for the After-School program. Home language support (Spanish) will be provided for the areas of math and science instruction. The principal will oversee the program providing guidance and assistance to teachers, parents, and students. The principal will also provide professional development activities as well as orientation sessions to the parents. The school aide will assist teachers with the attendance, phone calls to parents as needed, snacks for the students and supplies. Weekly student attendance sheets will be generated by the school ELL coordinator and maintained in a binder. Permissions slips will be generated in English and in Spanish and other languages if available. These will be distributed and collected by the school aide. The ELL coordinator will also maintain these forms in the afterschool binder. The proposed program will consist of Mathematics, ENL/ELA, and Science. All resources and materials are supplemental and distinct from materials used for daily instruction. Technology-based projects and activities will also be implemented as part of the curricula in place. Students will be engaged in web-based learning programs such as: "READ THEORY" and "Vocabulary A-Z". The program "READ THEORY” will provide diagnostics and intervention in reading and also help students increase reading/literacy skills. Vocabulary A-Z is also an online resource for teachers and students that provide rich vocabulary instruction that fuels reading gains and overall literacy. ‘Vocabulary Links’ is a resource that assists in academic vocabulary learning and language acquisition. Teachers will also implement Writing Frames to reinforce students in the writing process. For project-based learning in Math an Science, students will be involved in group activities that include CCLS tasks in English and Spanish to help them develop their ability to analyze, synthesize, reason, problem-solve and evaluate concepts taught as well as make connections to real life situations. Finish Line Math is also a resource available in English and in Spanish that utilizes the common core standards. Teachers will plan age-appropriate lessons including rigor in selected tasks with "Multiple Points of Entry" including scaffolding and an array of differentiation strategies to address students' needs. This type of planning will provide the students with the opportunity to engage in an integrated language learning experience as they develop critical thinking skills in core subjects. The goal is to assist students in building higher order thinking skills, build academic language "Tier 2 Vocabulary" and academic skills in English. Additional strategies that will be incorporated by the teaching staff include exit slips, checklists, turn and talk, Jig Saw, choral speaking, read aloud, freeze frames, and total physical response. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III Professional Development is needed to keep the ENL and Bilingual teachers abreast to using current strategies for aligning curricula to Common Core State Standards. The Professional Development will include Monday workshops from 2:25PM to 3:40PM throughout the school year provided by teachers and professional Learning workshop series offered by QNFSC. This will be at no cost to the Title III program. The school principal offers refresher PD with the teachers about Advance/Charlotte Danielson's Framework to discuss specific domains and components from the rubric. Workshops are geared for teachers to implement lessons with differentiated instructional strategies, rigorous tasks with scaffolds, formative assessments aligned to common core standards, and build student assessment data for our newcomers. Professional Development topics offered by QNFSC Instructional Leads include: 'Use of formative assessment in the classroom', 'Checking for Deeper Understanding' and ‘Critical thinking skills-Extended Learning Tasks’. The teacher-led PD's include 'Strategies for Student Discourse' and 'Using Technology Effectively with English Language Learners'. Teacher teams also conduct weekly meetings to share best practices: "Student Data and Profile", "Organizing the Newcomer Student Portfolio", "Data -Driven Instruction", "Formative Assessments and Exit Slips", "Using Technology to Organize Student Data", "Rigor and Multiple Points of Entry" and "Planning and Preparation: Curriculum Maps". By using the CIPL books for professional learning series: ‘Teaching to Transform: An Instructional Practice Guide to Support Struggling Readers in grades 6-12’, and ‘STEM Handbook’, the ENL and Bilingual teachers will plan and implement units along with instructional techniques and strategies for classroom use. Teachers will share best practices and effective instructional approaches to build academic language. Teachers will also discuss student engagement and student progress during a common administrative period once a week. The ENL/Bilingual teachers will attend monthly QNFSC meetings and upcoming workshops offered by the DOE Department for ELLs throughout the academic school year. They will involve themselves in turn-key training, once they return to the school in order to share acquired knowledge with their colleagues. The school secretary and the school guidance counselor will attend QNFSC professional learning series and trainings related to socio-emotional awareness, Galaxy, Payroll and STARS programming. Agendas and sign-in sheets for professional learning series will be maintained in the main office as part of the professional development binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 74  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents play a crucial role in the academic success as well as the overall well-being of their child. The Academy staff works with parents as partners in education. A welcoming environment is provided for them to encourage their active participation in school matters. At the Academy, Title I funds as well as other resources are utilized for parental involvement. All letters and flyers provided to parents are sent in English and Spanish. Based upon availability of translation, letters in other languages like Bengali, Urdu and Arabic are also sent. The Parent Coordinator and guidance counselor make follow up telephone calls to parents as well. We also have multilingual staff members who serve as interpreters. In September, parents will be invited to attend an orientation session that includes a description of the Title I and Title III programs. Parents are provided with informational booklets including CCSS booklets in different languages and other reading materials as part of the parent library. These resources are obtained by the school and are available to parents to read and further familiarize themselves with educational policies and school activities. Parents are invited to a "Family Night: Meet the Teacher" in September. Parents also receive monthly calendars with scheduled school events and a monthly newsletter. The following workshop meetings are planned for the school year based on our newly arrived immigrant student and family needs and also based on our socio-emotional awareness plan: September- Orientation to the New York City Public School System for newcomer parents (Available in different languages), Title I and Title III Orientation; October- The High School Application Process and Effective Partnerships with your Child’s School: Parent and Teacher Relationship ; November-Cyber Safety , Parent/Teacher conferences; December- Parenting Skills-Responding to Challenging Behaviors; January- Know Your Rights; February- Mental Health 101; March- Bully or Bystander; April- Safe Streets: Gang and Drug Awareness; May- LGBTQ: What you need to know; June-Self-Care. Each workshop is approximately two hours long and offered when available in English, Spanish, Bengali and Arabic. These workshops are at no cost to the Title III program. They are provided by the community centers, Elmcore org, and by the DOE School Mental Health and the Office for Immigration Affairs. Parents are also referred to CIANA (Center for the Integration and Advancement of New Americans) and to HANAC Adult Education Program. Our school has a school wide student progress monitoring system: Parents are provided with a quarterly student report of their child's progress. They are invited to comment or contact the school if they have concerns. Teachers are available to conference with parents every Tuesday afternoon from 2:25PM - 3:35PM. When necessary, intervention includes a meeting with the parents, the school guidance counselor and the teacher and sometimes the student as well. We have a multilingual staff that serve as interpreters in the areas of Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Russian and Spanish. The guidance counselor and the parent coordinator also utilizes the phone resources of Translation and Interpretation unit when meeting with parents. A final report is sent to the parents at the end of the program. Excellent attendance, participation, and other commendations are granted to students at a final meeting where they receive certificates and awards. A complete record of agendas, attendance, sign-in sheets will be maintained in a binder of monthly parent engagement activities located in the general office. The parent coordinator collects the attendance/sign-in sheets for each workshop. 2018-19 CEP 75 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 76  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name ACADEMY FOR NEW AMERICANS Borough Queens School Number 235 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal BETTY CARTAGENA Coach NONE ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher TATIANA KORNILOVA Teacher/Subject Area EVELYN GOMEZ/SOCIAL STUDIES Teacher/Subject Area CHRISTINA ROSA/MATH Related-Service Provider NONE Superintendent DR. PHILIP COMPOSTO Assistant Principal NONE Coach NONE School Counselor JIMMY JOZA Parent DALIA LARA Parent Coordinator CARMEN SANTIAGO Field Support Center Staff Member EVELYN MOSQUEA Other (Name and Title) LAC: CARMEN SANTIAGO/PC C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 77  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 189 Total number of ELLs 189 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 100.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): SPANISH If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 4 1 3 2 Lang. SPANISH Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 27 7 29 8 24 9 10 11 12 0 27 29 24 0 0 0 0 Tot # 80 0 0 0 0 0 80 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The follow assessments are administered to our newcomer students: Internal Assessments: Fall and Spring Teacher created Placement Tests for English language and Math. Social Studies Performance Tasks will be used for teacher instructional purposes. External Assessments: ELL Periodic Assessment Fall and Spring, HLA (Spanish) Assessment for the Bilingual classes. We will use Performance Series -Scantron for ELA Reading and for Math to provide intervention and monitor student progress. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The School Master Schedule includes a period for the Testing Coordinator to administer the NYSITELL and Spanish Lab to newly enrolled students within ten days. Based on the results of the NYSITELL, students are placed in Entering, Emerging, 2018-19 CEP 78 Transitional or Expanding ENL classes. Students are also assessed with teacher generated placement tests to monitor language performance level and progress. Bilingual classes are administered the HLA assessment issued by the NYCDOE. These tests are also used as pre and Mid-Point assessment tools. Students also receive ELL Periodic Assessments administered in the fall and in the spring. We will be using DOE Performance Series for ELA Reading and Math as an assessment tool to provide intervention and to monitor progress of all students. Identified SIFE are administered the LENS. All this data assists teacher teams during their weekly planning meetings to analyze student literacy and language proficiency levels, prepare individual item analysis reports of student progress in language skills and to also to drive instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The following assessment tools are implemented: Teacher-generated language placement tests in three levels (Basic, Intermediate and Advanced), ELL Periodic Assessment, Home Language Arts (Spanish Reading) Assessment, These tests are administered three times a year. Other assessment tools and systems that are being implemented in the classroom include Vocabulary A-Z for ENL classes. The goals of these digital programs is to help students make gains in English language and reading. These programs also combine growth measure and individualized instruction for students. Teachers are able to use this data to target instruction to students' specific needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each content area including ENL teachers meet on a weekly basis to analyze student performance on the aforementioned assessments. They plan accordingly based on the needs of the students. Core subject teams also meet on a weekly basis to prepare a data analysis report with trends and findings. Based on these results next steps are devised. These reports are discussed during meetings with the Inquiry team address data driven instruction and to provide support. These reports are also compared prior year data that demonstrate student longitudinal progress and growth. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A. We are a grade 6th through 8th school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns on the NYSITELL confirm that newcomer students arrive at the Academy with no or very limited English language skills. The vast majority of students are at the Entering level at the time the NYSITELL is administered. The Spanish speaking students who take the LAB Spanish score at 65% or higher indicating that the language barrier exists in English. The data patterns on the NYSESLAT indicated that most students are at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency which require Stand Alone ENL classes. The data shows that students perform better on the receptive skills (listening and reading) than on the productive skills (speaking and Writing). We use this data to create classes accordingly. Those students that score at an expanding level have an ENL teacher and a content area teacher (Co-Teaching). Bilingual math is offered in grades 6th to 8th. All students receive ELA classes. The results of NYSESLAT, ELA and Math are used to create after school intervention that focus on the needs of the students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Programming for students is based on the prior year's results on the NYSESLAT exam. Students' class assignments are determined by these results (Entering/Emerging, Transitional/Expanding). For school data analysis, we conduct weekly inquiry team meetings that include the data specialist, the testing coordinator, content area teachers and the guidance counselor. We create a list of focus students: Lowest Third Populatipn taking ELA and Math. We also create a Test Data list which includes language proficiency levels 1 and 2 for each student. These lists of students are given to each staff member to plan with data driven instruction. 2018-19 CEP 79  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students who are at Entering and Emerging levels receive block periods (90 minutes) Stand Alone ENL and (90 minutes) of ENL/ELA with a certified ENL teacher. Students who are at aTransitional and/or Expanding levels receive block periods (90minutes) Integrated ENL/Content Area and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA. Students are grouped as described above in ENL stand-alone classes. NYSITELL data and NYSESLAT scores are used to group students homogeneously according to student language proficiency level for each grade (6, 7 and 8). Since I.S. 235 is a transitional school for newly arrived immigrants, students stay for one year, 'Commanding' ELLs are assigned to their zone school to continue to receive the required units of study in ELA. b. TBE program. If applicable. All bilingual students (Spanish) who are at the Entering and Emerging levels based on NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT scores receive block periods of 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL with a certified ESL teacher. They also receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. All TBE students in grades 6, 7, and 8 receive 180 minutes of Home Language Arts instruction (Spanish) and Bilingual instruction (Spanish) in content areas. c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students who are Entering and Emerging receive 180 minutes of Stand alone ENL with a certified ENL teacher. They receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are Transitional and Expanding will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/Content Area and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA. Students are grouped according to NYSESLAT performance scores in stand alone classes. This includes all students in bilingual classes. The bilingual classes also receive 180 minutes of Home Language Arts instruction (Spanish) and Bilingual instruction in content area classes. Since I.S. 235 is a transitional school for newly arrived immigrants, students stay for one year, Commanding ELLs are assigned to their zone school to continue to receive the required units of study in ELA and 90 minutes of ENL. Students are grouped homogeneously according to NYSESLAT and/or NYSITELL performance levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Program model TBE: Core content: Social Studies, Science and Math are taught in the student's native language: Spanish in Bilingual classes as per CR Part 154 for Bilingual Transitional classes. They also receive 180 minutes a week of instruction in Home Language Arts: Spanish. Program model ENL: ENL classes receive core content in English. Expanding classes receive ENL integrated in the content area. Examples of Instructional approaches include but are not limited to building academic language by using Marzano's Academic Vocabulary strategy. Technology is frequently used to enhance lessons with visuals and student interaction. Classrooms are print rich with evidence of word walls. Students maintain journals for all content areas (Math, Social Studies and Science). Scientific Inquiry includes small group interaction. All teachers teams create CCLS aligned lesson plans using the DOK for questioning and discussion techniques, tiered leveled questions, strategies like "Brainstorming", "Think-Pair-Share", "Turn 2018-19 CEP 80  and Talk", Jigsaw, Gallery Walk, Reaction guides and Exit Tickets. Glossaries are implemented in class and during assessments. Vocabulary sheets are provided in English and Spanish for Bilingual classes. Teachers also prepare group activities with scaffolded tasks that further communication skills. Graphic organizers are implemented as a tool to make vocabulary connections with concepts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The school test coordinator administers the Spanish LAB and NYSITEL. The Spanish Native Language Arts teacher administers the HLA assessment during the Fall and Spring. Teachers generate tests and utilizes formative assessments in content areas. The Math and Science departments implement placement tests in Spanish. Content teachers in the bilingual classes assess in the native language (Spanish). Teachers plan according to the language needs of the students. Where possible, teachers create instructional tasks and assessment in languages other than Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. All teachers plan and prepare lessons which include activities with "Access for All". Ex: Same student activity however using multiple entry points, detailed step by step directions; visuals for individual/group task, translated tasks, scaffolds, tiered questions, teacher/student conferencing, hands-on activities, lesson models (real world scenarios) on the Smart Board, Buddy system in groups. Students maintain academic vocabulary journals.b. All our students are newcomers. Therefore teacher plan and prepare lessons and student tasks which include comprehensive language and vocabulary activities. Content area subjects such as Science and Social Studies include student activities with "Access for All". Ex: Tiered tasks may include different levels of reading, detailed step by step directions for scientic inquiry and problem solving. All classes incorporate real world scenarios, visuals and models for individual/group task, translated tasks, teacher-student conferencing, hands-on activities, use of Smart Board and laptops, student group assignments.c. Lessons include activities with extensions and student tasks which engage students in high order thinking. Ex: Student tasks include guided questions and real world concepts where students apply learning concepts. Extensive use of differentiated levels of reading, detailed step by step directions with visuals for individual/group task, teacher-student conferencing, hands-on activities, lesson models on the Smart Board, use of laptop computers and group/ student self assessments. d. N/A Our school does not have Long Term ELLs. e. N/A Our school does not have Former ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school is for newcomers and at this time we are unable to identify ELL-SWDs because of their limited stay here. Lessons include activities with "Access for All". Ex: Same activity using different levels of reading, detailed step by step directions with visuals for individual/group task, translated tasks, teacher small group conferencing, hands-on activities, lesson models on the Smart Board, Buddy system in groups. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school is for recently arrived newcomers and we have no students with IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have the following academic intervention programs for ELA and Math. All students are inclusive including SIFE. We have specifically targeted the lowest third population. Students that score at the Entering and Emerging level including SIFE students, receive academic intervention services. These intervention services are offered in English and Spanish during after school and Saturday Academy. The guidance counselor is an integral part of the Saturday Academy. He works with the 2018-19 CEP 81  students as well as with the parents. The school master schedule allows Literacy classes once a week to supplement the regular classes. Literacy is infused across the curriculum in all content areas to enhance language and vocabulary acquisition. All teachers plan tasks with scaffolds and academic vocabulary to target language. Vocabulary sheets are provided in English and Spanish to students. All content areas implement journal writing to enhance vocabulary and content. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be implementing more technology-based programs to monitor student progress. such as: Performance Series in ELA and Math, Vocabulary A-Z, Language Central Science. Academic and literacy will be an instructional focus for all student needs. The school master schedule will reflect a designated a reading/literacy period. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not be discontinuing any program/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All school programs are made assessible to all our newcomer students since we are a newcomer school. Students are offered the opportunity to participate in the CHAMPS sports program on Saturdays. The following community based organization, Sport and Arts in School Foundations, will be offering homework help, tutoring, STEM as well as academic intervention services with enrichment in Literacy, ENL and Math during after school program. We will be offering an enrichment program for English language, Math and Science during a Saturday Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include but are not limited to: Technology:1. Performance Series-ELA and Math2. Vocabulary A-Z LICENSES3. JUPITER ED LICENSES4. Read Theory for Literacy InterventionTextbooks/ Supplements5. GLENCOE CCSS MATH TEXTBOOKS6. VOCABULARY LINKS FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT7. INSIDE by National Geographic Series 8. READY NEW YORK CCLS – ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS PRACTICE BOOKS9. SCIENCE AND MATH JOURNALS10. Wordly Wise 3000 workbooks11. Pearson-Language Central- Science12. America Pre-Columbian to the Present (Spanish and English) 13. NYC DOE Passport to Social Studies Units of Study Grades 6, 7 & 814. Glencoe Science- (English and Spanish)15. Go Math (In Spanish) 16. Continental Press- Practice Exercise in Basic Math (English) 17. Learning Essential Math Skills (Gutenberg Inc) 18. Science by the Grade (Houghton Mifflin) [Resources for Teachers] 17. Word Walls Journal Books (Gutenberg Inc) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Transitional Bilingual classes the materials are available in English and in Spanish. There is also use of Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries in a multitude of languages for both TBE and ENL. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Supplementary materials to support our newcomers include but are not limited to: grade level CCSS workbooks in English and Spanish for math, Passport units in social studies, and grade level science textbooks as well as Language Central by Pearson. All classrooms are equipped with a multitude of leveled books as is the school library in a variety of languages. The guidance counselor meets regularly with each class TBE and ENL. Level reading materials and resources aligned to CCSS include academic vocabulary and reading instruction for all newcomer ELLs (Inside: National Geographic, Vocabulary Links for English language development, Wordly Wise 3000 workbooks, and Ready New York CCLS – English Language Arts Practice Books and Marzano's Vocabulary journals.) Other services/resources include infusion of literacy across the curriculum with a focus to Advanced Literacy Hallmark 2. Performance Series for ELA reading and Math will serve as a progress monitoring tool for 2018-19 CEP 82  instruction. Vocabulary A-Z and Social Studies and Science Literacy provide leveled academic vocabulary in content for all students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is co-located in building P.S.234. Therefore, we share school facilities: Gymnasium assigned on Mondays and Tuesdays, school cafeteria (student lunch is assigned for 12:40PM every day of the week except on school half days. We coordinate the use of the auditorium by submitting in September a calendar of events for the school year. Academic after-school programs are not affected because these are held in our school on our floor. Extracurricular activities are held on Mondays and Tuesdays and also during Saturday Academy. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school is for newcomers only grades 6 to 8. We enroll students all year long. We do have at the beginning of the school year a "Meet the Teacher Night" which includes all teachers, school counselor and parent coordinator. Each parent and newly enrolled child is given a "Welcome Tour" of the school by the parent coordinator. They are provided with brochures about the school. The guidance counselor receives parents and families of 8th garde student and provides them with an orientation of the high school application process. The principal and the parent coordinator create a list at the beginning of the school year for all activities/seminars/workshops for the school year. When a new student arrives after the school year begins, our custom is to buddy them up with students from their native country. The guidance counselor is the coordinator of the student council. Each member of the student council welcomes new students and offers help should it be needed. The parent coordinato assists families throughout the year by helping the new students and families acclimate to the new school in a comforting manner. The parent coordinator publishes a newsletter and the guidance counselor creates a monthly activities calendar. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not have any language electives since we are a newcomer school for English Language Learners. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A We do not have a Dual Language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Due to the fact that our school is for newcomers only, our professional development plan is always focused on the ELL student. All teachers receive and provide professional development specifically targeted towards ELLs. We have a Professional Development Team who plan and develop a calendar of workshops. The school leader provides to all teachers and staff with opportunities to facilitate grade and vertical team meetings. To ensure full participation of the staff, the school master schedule will include common administrative periods three times a week in addition to the Monday Professional Development time. Core Subject teacher leaders and school staff will attend ELL, ELA, Science, Social Studies, Math and other professional development offered by the DOE and QNBFSC. Professional Development will also focus on an Individualized Student Assessment System for reading and math, literacy in Science and Social Studies. Monday’s professional development time will 2018-19 CEP 83  be dedicated to teachers sharing best practices in content areas: ENL, Math, Science and Social Studies. Teachers will attend Professional Development offered by DELLS. QNBFSC-ELL liaison, and ENL teachers will provide professional development in using multiple entry points to provide all learners with access to content.All teachers will meet periodically during professional learning time and common administrative periods to share best practices and identify strategies to better support students.We are partnering with Hunter College TESOL. Student interns will be working directly with the ENL and Co-Teachers of content areas in order to better serve our students.Teachers will attend trainings and workshops provided by DELLS and turnkey information to their respective teams. The guidance counselor, parent coordinator and school secretary will attend mandated trainings and workshops to support our ELLs and parents. We do not have paraprofessionals, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists because there are no students with IEPs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Due to the fact that our school population consists of 100% newcomer ELLs, all professional development that is provided in the school is geared to that population. Each staff member attends the workshops offered by the school. A majority of the staff also attends workshops provided by the DOE and DELLS regarding ELLs specific PD. The principal maintains a Professional development binder that includes the activities, agendas and attendance on PDs offered at the school. For those teachers attending workshops provided by the DOE, the teachers bring back the agendas which are also maintained in the Principal's Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school offers "Welcome Tour" for every parent when students are registered. There is a Title I orientation in September where parents are introduced to the different programs that the school offers regarding ELL students. DOE videos are presented in a variety of languages regarding these programs and choices. When available, we try to have an interpreter to answer any questions parents may have regarding these programs. Parents are encouraged to meet their child's teachers at the beginning of the school year. At these meetings, teachers discuss with parents their expectations . Parents are provided with a syllabus from each teacher. Parents receive quarterly student progress reports from each teacher aligned to CCLS. Our school maintains an open door policy to parents so they are not limited to the Parent Engagement on Tuesdays. Parents are aware that they can reach out to teachers at any time. Since our staff is multilingual, we provide translation/interpretation as needed. We have a multi-lingual staff to provide interpretation and translation in the following languages: Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, French, Hindi, Urdu, Russian, Greek. This year parents will have the ability to view on Jupiter Grade.com, their child's attendance, grades and class assessments.They will be to see their child's progress on Performance Series for ELA and Math. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All outreach to parents include written communication (letters in English and Spanish and other languages as needed, phone calls, monthly calendars) Also there is written communication for all meetings, monthly P.A. and SLT meetings, Parent-Teacher Conferences. The letters, flyers, agendas and sign-in sheets are maintained by the parent coordinator and by the principal. These documents are filed in the main office. Teachers also maintain communication logs for meetings/phone conferences. Our school provides the following activities that foster Parent Involvement: Monthly P.A. meetings are offered by the parent coordinator. The parents on the SLT turnkey the information from the SLT meetings to the parents. We also have Breakfast with the Principal offered at the beginning of the school year. Parents also have opportunities to volunteer in the many school events throughout the school year. Translation services are also provided to parents during meetings with the teachers. The parent coordinator provides free morning ENL classes to parent three times a week. School parent workshops are planned in conjunction with parent needs as indicated on a school provided survey. A designated school mental health consultant assists the school by providing links and resources for the parents. A workshop calendar provided by different 2018-19 CEP 84  community based organizations to conduct specific evening workshops for parents: Know Your Rights, Parenting Skills, Cyberbullying, LGBTQ issues and Gang Awareness. Events and workshops include but not limited: ENL/Literacy Classes, Safety Emergency Preparedness-GRP, Town Hall Meeting (Ps. 234/I.S235), High School Application Process, Career Day, Thanksgiving and Holiday Events, Tuesdays Teacher-Parent Engagement Afternoons, Monthly P.A Meetings, Winter and Spring Concert, International Night. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our school serves newly arrived immigrants. A majority of them have been separated from their families for up to twelve years. They are adolescents adjusting to changes in their bodies, adapting to a new culture and language and living with virtual strangers (parents). These factors play a pivotal role in the learning process. We provide a nurturing environment. We (staff, students, parents) work very hard to achieve our goals. Sometimes we don't reap our rewards until years after the students have moved on to another school. Testimonies from former students highlight that our school was the catalyst in their success. 2018-19 CEP 85 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Betty Cartagena, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 86  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ACADEMY FOR NEW AMERICANS School DBN: 30Q235 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) BETTY CARTAGENA Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal CARMEN SANTIAGO Parent Coordinator TATIANA KORNILOVA ENL/Bilingual Teacher DALIA LARA Parent EVELYN GOMEZ Teacher/Subject Area CHRISTINA ROSA Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach JIMMY JOZA School Counselor PHILIP COMPOSTO N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member FATIMA SASSI Other LAC N/A N/A Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 2018-19 CEP 87  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q235 School Name: ACADEMY FOR NEW AMERICANS Superintendent: DR. PHILIP COMP The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No CARMEN SANTIAGO PARENT COORDINATOR (BIL) FATIMA SASSI TEACHER YES NO YES NO * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The following data and methodologies implemented at our school to assess language preferences from the parents include the following: Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS ELL reports and school generated parent survey. The Academy has a multilingual staff. Where possible, written communication to parents and care-givers is provided in English and the native language. Translations are made available in the major languages represented by the student population. Furthermore, written communication that is provided directly from the Department of Education and readily available in a variety of languages is downloaded and disseminated to the intended parents. Oral translators are provided at school meetings. Teachers and other staff represent languages that include Spanish, Italian, Arabic, French, Hindi, Urdu, Greek, Russian, Chinese, and Bengali. Translation and interpretation service signs are posted by the "Sign-In" desk and the Main Office. Our 2018-19 CEP 88  parent coordinator is very accommodating and helpful to the families. She provides assistance and utilizes various resources to provide the necessary communication in many languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BURMESE GREEK GERMAN BENGALI HINDI ITALIAN NEPALI SPANISH ENGLISH TAGALOG PUNJABI CHINESE PORTUGUESE THAI TIBETAN URDU 28 1 2 2 31 6 2 7 189 27 3 2 3 6 1 2 2 8.92 0.32 0.64 0.64 9.87 1.91 0.64 2.23 60.19 8.6 0.96 0.64 0.96 1.91 0.32 0.64 0.64 28 1 2 2 31 6 2 7 188 28 2 2 3 5 1 2 2 8.92 0.32 0.64 0.64 9.87 1.91 0.64 2.23 59.87 8.92 0.64 0.64 0.96 1.59 0.32 0.64 0.64 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 89  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. HOME LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION SURVEY SCHOOL EMERGENCY CARDS RACE ETHNICITY IDENTIFICATION FORM RESIDENCY QUESTIONNAIRE SEPTEMBER/JUNE SEPTEMBER/JUNE SEPTEMBER/JUNE SEPTEMBER/JUNE DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS PARENT SURVEY & PROGRAM SELECTION SEPTEMBER/JUNE DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS 2018-19 CEP 90  SCHOOL HANDBOOK SEPTEMBER/JUNE MONTHLY CALENDAR SEPTEMBER/JUNE HIGH SCHOOL DIRECTORY & APPLICATION SCHOOL HAS TRANSLATED THE HANDBOOK SCHOOL TRANSLATES THE MONTHLY CALENDAR OCTOBER / DECEMBER GUIDE FOR PARENTS OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS SEPTEMBER/JUNE PARENT GUIDES SERIES (CCSS) [EMPOWERING IMMIGRANT PARENTS, BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN SCHOOL & HOME, SUPPORTING FAMILIES IN CRISIS, SCHOOL COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT, SEPTEMBER/JUNE ENTITLEMENT LETTERS SEPTEMBER/JUNE DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS SCHOOL HAS PURCHASED THE GUIDES IN A VARIETY OF LANGUAGES DOE PROVIDES TRANSLATED VERSIONS 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide MEET THE TEACHER PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCES SEPTEMBER NOVEMBER, interpretation service(s)? OUR MULTILINGUAL STAFF WILL BE PROVIDING ORAL TRANSLATION OUR MULTILINGUAL STAFF WILL BE PROVIDING ORAL TRANSLATIONS 2018-19 CEP 91  FEBRUARY, MAY TUESDAY PARENT ENGAGEMENT SEPTEMBER/JUNE HIGH SCHOOL APPLICATION NOVEMBER PROCESS OUR MULTILINGUAL STAFF WILL BE PROVIDING ORAL TRANSLATIONS SCHOOL WILL UTILIZE THE INTERPRETATION SERVICES OFFERED BY THE DOE 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our multilingual Crisis Prevention and Intervention Team will communicate to the families in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school leader will provide a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 to the staff during the Chancellor's Conference Day in September. Staff will be encouraged to work with the Parent Coordinator throughout the year to ensure that families have at their disposal all opportunities to be fully engaged in their child's education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will provide all parents with Information for Parents on the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Services pamphlets at enrollment. We, consistent with Chancellor's Regulation A-663, will provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively. Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Our multilingual staff will also serve as translators/interpreters. A Welcome Poster in different languages will be posted outside the Main Office as well as in the Guidance Suite. All parents will receive a Parents Bill of Rights pamphlet as well as the Parents' Guide to Language Access. These are available in a variety of languages. The Parent Coordinator will maintain these resources in the Parent Library which is fully accessible to all parents/caregivers. A Language ID Guide will be available at the security desk and in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 92  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A survey in multiple languages will be provided to the parents regarding the quality and availability of interpretation and translations services. It will be distributed at the end of the school year so that we may adequately service our parents the following school year. These will be collected and reviewed by the parent coordinator and maintained in the office. Based on the responses from the parents, we will continue to reach out to the interpretation services offered by the DOE. 2018-19 CEP 93 
