2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q240 School Name: VERITAS ACADEMY Principal: CHERYL QUATRANO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 25Q240 Veritas Academy 342500011240 9, 10, 11, 12 35-01 Union Street, Flushing, NY 11354 718-888-7520 Phone Number: 718-888-7524 Fax: Cheryl Quatrano cquatrano@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Cheryl Quatrano Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: HaralambosThomatos Beatrice Strong Beatrice Strong Evelyn Ponce Allison Gualpa Gabriela Vallebuona NA District Information Geographical District: 25 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-7696 Phone Number: (718) 281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5488 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CHERYL QUATRANO Jamie Kurtzman BEATRICESTRONG BINTAJENNINGS EVELYN PONCE ALLISON GUALPA GABRIELA VALLEBUONA Cynthia Demonte Jean Maria Francis ROBERTSESTAK *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name HaralambosThomatos Nina Greebler Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Veritas Academy is a school in which faculty and staff members are committed to finding and igniting the gifts and talents of every student. Inspiring their interests, we aim to develop life-long lovers of learning who have the skills and confidence to matriculate at four year colleges and universities and take on real world challenges. Veritas Academy graduates know their voice has an impact; they are active citizens who are inquisitive, informed, self-aware, and empathetic ----prepared and eager to contribute to the world. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Veritas Academy is a Renzulli school of learning which offers each student an opportunity to find and develop his or her own unique profile of gifts and talents. We are committed to providing challenging, in-depth, and enjoyable learning experiences for all students through our Schoolwide Enrichment Model. Our collaborative school culture focuses on the development of talents in all students and provides a broad range of advanced-level enrichment activities. Instructional technology infused through all subject areas ensures that students develop the necessary skills for the demands of the 21st century job market. The school culture celebrates individuality and creativity. Our goal is to develop a lifelong love of learning in our students so that they become successful and creative problem solvers, ethical citizens of the world, knowing they can make a difference. Veritas Academy is dedicated to the academic and social-emotional development of all students. This is reflected in our two schoolwide goals: Academic: We will nurture our quest for understanding the world by completing interest-based investigations in all content areas. Social/Emotional: We will develop our empathetic capacities by respecting the perspectives of all people. Veritas Academy has partnered with the following organizations: -South Street Seaport ● Anne Frank Center ● New York Hall of Science ● University of Connecticut ● St. John’s University ● Carnegie Hall Veritas Academy is a school with a diverse population of students. Our English Language Learners (ELLs) population is 8 percent, and approximately 17 percent of our students have special needs. These groups of students have specific needs and require special educational considerations. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners are students who have acquired their primary listening and speaking skills in a language other than English. In addition to language acquisition, ELLs are asked to merge their cultures, backgrounds, and experiences with those of their new environment in order to achieve academic success. The majority of our ELL students are Spanish speaking. Consequently, many do not have a firm grasp of their native tongue. It is therefore difficult for many of our ELL students to transfer language skills to their new language, i.e., English. Veritas Academy is small school which has a sizable amount of special needs students. We plan to schedule for school year 2018-2019 10 special education classes, specifically, 6 ICT and 4 self-contained classes. The majority of our 2018-19 CEP 10  special needs students are learning disabled. Special education students are in need of differentiated instructional methods which teach to all of the learning modalities---visual, auditory kinesthetic, tactile. Specific learning materials, aids and equipment may be needed to facilitate access to the curriculum. Many special needs students are in need of additional support around social-emotional development and real-life skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per the Framework for Great Schools, Veritas has made the most progress in the area of rigorous instruction in relationship to career, college and civic readiness. This is evidenced by our higher than expected graduation rate of 92% for June of 2018 which is higher than our graduation rate of 82% for June of 2017. Our key area of focus for school year 2018-2019 will be in the Framework area of Rigorous Instruction specifically concerning CDOS (Career Development and Occupational Studies). We are choosing this as a focus as only only 3% of our students received this credential in 2017 and 15% in 2018. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q240 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 558 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 8 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 2 School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 70.4% % Reduced Lunch 9.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 57.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 75% 76.5% 19.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 41 87.9% 4.8% 17.9% 12.5% 15.6% 4.1% 4 32% 5.4 N/A N/A 87% 73% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Performance Trends Analysis: 1. The following has been cited as Veritas Academy's strengths relative to the Framework element of Rigorous Instruction as per the 2017 New York City School Performance Dashboard and 2018 June graduation percentage: -In Good Standing by the NY State Education Department -Our graduation rate of 92% -June 2018 -Our 4-year high school persistence rate of 92% is higher than that of the City, borough and comparison group. -Our Common Core English Regents score of 78% is higher than that of the City, borough, comparison group and New York state. -Our ELLs average score of 64% on the English Regents was slightly higher than that of the City, borough and comparison group. --Our ELLs average score of 68% on the Algebra I Regents was slightly higher than that of the City, borough and comparison group. -Our SWD (Students with Disabilities) average score of 65% on the English Regents was slightly higher than that of the City, borough and comparison group. -Our SWD (Students with Disabilities) average score of 62% on the Algebra I Regents was slightly higher than that of the City, borough and comparison group. 2. Veritas Academy wishes to focus upon having more students in all groupings, special and general education and English Language Learners alike , obtain a CDOS credential upon graduation. This is our priority need as only 3% of all 2018-19 CEP 13  graduating students obtained this endorsement in 2017 and 15% in 2018. This credential will recognize each individual student’s preparation and skills for post-school employment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of all graduating Veritas Academy seniors will receive the CDOS (Career Development Occupational Studies) endorsement on their high school diploma. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advisory Program-Students will meet in groups with a mentor to receive instruction on career skills, college/career/trade school readiness and receive social/emotional support. See below some of the various topics to be covered: -Career development and preparation -Realistic goal setting -Development of strong study, communication and organizational skills -Monitoring of academic progress -How to mange workplace disagreements -Self-regulation and grit Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Veritas seniors September 6, 2018 to June 11, 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principal, Senior Guidance Counselor, Social Worker 2018-19 CEP 15  2018-19 CEP 16  Veritas Teacher Assistants Program-Seniors will assist teacher and students in U.S. History class each day. Veritas Seniors Veritas Senior Ambassadors-Students will volunteer at all Veritas school events. Veritas Seniors Teachers, Assistant Principal September 6, 2018 to June 11, 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator September 6, 2018 to June 11, 2019 Specifically, September 26, 2018-Back to School Night; 2018-19 CEP 17  November 29-30, 2018-Parent-Teacher Conferences; March 7-8, 2019-Parent-Teacher Conferences; May 9-parent-Teacher Conferences 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Parents /guardians of seniors will be invited to a special CDOS program meeting during Back to School Night on September 26, 2018. Parents/guardians will be provided with job and career information which they can review with their children. 2. Parents and guardians will be invited to guest speak during advisory class sessions about their jobs/careers . This will take place from September 6, 2018 until the end of classes, June 11, 2019. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are our assistant principal, various senior teachers, senior guidance counselor, social worker and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling adjustments for planning time, teacher/supervisor per diem, teacher/supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 4, 2019, 15% of seniors will be on track for the CDOS endorsement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advisory class grades, Teacher Assistant Program attendance, participation in school-wide events as evidenced by sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Analysis: 1. Veritas Academy's strength relative to the Supportive Environment element of the Framework is that of Student Safety as per the 2017-2018 School Survey: -92% of students stated that they feel safe in their classes. -89% of students say that they feel safe traveling between home and Veritas Academy. -83% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria. 2. Our priority need which will be addressed in the goal and action plan for the Supportive Environment element is to have all teachers recognize and support students when they are in need. This is evidenced by only 53% of students stating on the 2017 School Survey that teachers support them when they are upset. 3. In order to support the whole child, Veritas has in place the following: -a full time social worker -3 guidance counselors -an assistant principal in charge of guidance services -various support groups led by our social worker, e.g., The Inner You, Bereavement. -Social-Emotional Inquiry Team (S.E.I.T.) which meets weekly to discuss student social-emotional issues -Advisory program -Leadership-Love in Action class-Students are taught social-emotional coping, self-regulation and leadership skills. Students also work and present on real-world service projects in and out of school. This is facilitated by our social worker and a teacher. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students will state on the 2018-2019 D.O.E. Student Survey that teachers support them when they are in need or troubled. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive 2 social-emotional professional development trainings on recognizing students in need. The particular struggles of Students with Disabilities (SWDs), English Language Learners (ELLs), pupils who are overage and under credited, Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) and Students in Temporary Housing (STH) will be discussed and emphasized. Our social worker will hold weekly Social Emotional Inquiry Team (S.E.I.T.) meetings with staff members to discuss students with non-academic issues. All staff members Teachers will be encouraged to attend out of school social-emotional professional development trainings. All staff All staff members September 4, 2018 Social worker and 3 guidance counselors January 28, 2019 Weekly-September 5, 2018 through June 11, 2019. September 5, 2018 through June 11, 2019. Social worker -Queens North-Department of Education -Veritas Assistant Principal of Operations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/guardians will be invited to attend 2 in school semester-based trainings on recognizing and supporting children with social-emotional difficulties. The trainings are to take place during the October and March PTA meetings (October 18, 2018 and March 21, 2019). The trainings will be conducted by our social worker and a guidance counselor. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Staff-Social worker, guidance personnel, administrative personnel -Per Session funding -Scheduling-S.E.I.T. meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  By February 11, 2018, 70 % of Veritas students will indicate on a school created survey that teachers support them when they are in need or distressed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Veritas Academy Student Social-Emotional Survey -DOE 2018-2019 Student Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Veritas Academy's strength relative to the Collaborative Teachers element of the Framework is that of Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction (94% positive): -100% of teachers say that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. -100% of teachers say that they use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life. -100% of teachers say that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the developmental needs and learning interests of all their students. -100% of teachers say that they adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and backgrounds positively. -100% of teachers say that they distinguish linguistic and cultural differences from learning disabilities. 2. Our priority need which will be addressed in the goal and action plan for the Collaborative Teachers element is to have more teachers have the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. This is evidenced by only 72% of teachers stating on the 2017-2018 DOE Teacher Survey that they had this opportunity during the 2017-2018 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 25  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will state on the 2018-2019 DOE Teacher Survey that they had the opportunity to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  3 Campus wide professional development trainings involving our 3 high schools. Staff and administration of Veritas High School, the Queens School for Language Development and Flushing High School Staff members from Veritas Academy, the Queens School for Language Development and Flushing High School. September 5, 2018-hosted by Veritas Academy November 6, 2018-Election Day PD-Hosted by the Queens School for Language Development January 28, 2019-PD hosted by Flushing High School Veritas Academy teachers to attend professional development opportunities with other teachers outside of our campus. Veritas teachers September 10, 2018 to June 11, 2019 DOE Queens North trainings 2018-19 CEP 27 Veritas Academy to collaborate with campus teachers on a campus wide project such as campus beautification. Projects will involve campus wide professional development. Campus teachers Campus Beautification professional development training- January 28, 2018 Campus wide science department chairpersons and assistant principals to organize-Veritas Academy, the Queens School for Language Development, Flushing High School 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will attend a Flushing Campus Beautification Fair where they will learn all about how the campus teachers worked together on this initiative, and how they can plant indoor and outdoor vegetables and herbs in order to encourage healthy eating for a healthy lifestyle. The fair is to take place in springtime. (Projected date-Saturday, May 18, 2019.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Involvement and per session funding, supplies (soil, plants, planting implements, aprons) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 85 % of teachers on our Veritas created 2018-2019 Teacher Survey will state that they had the opportunity of working productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Veritas Academy 2018-2019 Teacher Survey -N.Y.C. D.O.E. 2018-2019 Teacher Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Veritas Academy's strength relative to the Effective School Leadership element of the Framework as per the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey measures is that of Inclusive Leadership (93% positive). Components within this Effective School Leadership Framework element which can be deemed as strengths are the following: -93% of families stated that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. -95% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. -95% of teachers say that the curriculum, instruction and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school. 2. Our priority need which will be addressed in the goal and action plan for the Effective School Leadership element is for teachers to have more of an influence over planning how school discretionary school funds should be utilized. This was chosen because only 51% of teachers on the 2017-2018 DOE Teacher Survey felt that they had input regarding this spending of resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers state that they had an input as to how discretionary school funds are to be spent. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive a quarterly Wish List survey as to how they wish to see school discretionary funds spent. All teachers September 17, 2018 Assistant principals, Principal November 26, 2018 February 11, 2019 April 29, 2019 Teachers will receive information each semester as to the many ways discretionary funding can be used for all students, particularly Students with Disabilities (SWDs), English Language Learners (ELLs), pupils who are overage and under credited, Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) and Students in Temporary Housing (STH). All Teachers September 5, 2017 January 29, 2019 Assistant principals, Principal The principal will discuss discretionary funding with staff members during One-on-One conferences which occur 3 times per school year. All Teachers October Principal 2018 February 2019 May 2019 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/guardians will be apprised as to how the staff wishes our discretionary funds to be spent. This will be discussed at the November, March and June PTA meetings. (November 15, 2018; March 21, 2019; May 16, 2019). The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be our principal, parent coordinator and PTA president. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. discretionary funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 90% of teachers will have provided input on the spending of our school's discretionary funds. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be measured but 90% of teachers responding to a school created Discretionary Spending Wish List. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 1. Veritas Academy's strength relative to the Strong Family and Community Ties element of the Framework as per the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey measures is that of Outreach to Parents (88% positive). Components within this Strong Family and Community Ties Framework element which can be deemed as strengths are the following: -97% of teachers say that teachers at Veritas understand families' problems and concerns. -94% of families say that they are provided with opportunities to visit their child's classroom, e.g., observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. -94% of teachers say that teachers at Veritas work closely with families to meet students' needs. 2. Our priority need which will be addressed in the goal and action plan for the Strong Family and Community Ties element is for families to have many opportunities to volunteer time to support our school. This was chosen because only 52% of parents/guardians on the 2017-2018 D.O.E. Parent Survey stated that they had the opportunity to do so. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Veritas Academy will increase its school volunteer opportunities for families as measured by a 80% increase in parent/guardian volunteerism. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At the September PTA meeting parents/guardians will be given Veritas Volunteer sign-up forms to complete listing all of our schoolwide events. This form will also be posted on our school website and available in the main office. Parents/ guardians Parent Coordinator PTA President Sept. 13, 2018 Frequency-1 time Parents/guardians will be phone called via School Messenger and emailed regarding volunteering opportunities prior to all school events. Calls and emails will be made in English and Spanish. Parent/ guardians Sept. 6, 2018-June 11, 2019 Frequency-5 times per school year Parent Coordinator PTA President School secretary Parent/Guardian Volunteers Appreciation Dinner-Certificates and plaques to be awarded at springtime celebration Parent/ May 2018 Parent Coordinator Guardians Frequency-1 time PTA President Administration School secretary Parent Volunteers Cultural Outing Parent/ March 2017 Parent Coordinator Guardians Frequency-1 time PTA President Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent refreshments., materials, teacher/administrator per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent/guardian school volunteerism at meetings and events will increase by 50 percent from that of February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent/guardian sign-in sheets, sign-up forms and emails.  2018-2019 D.O.E. Parent Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) In class push-in services Small group and one-to-one During the school day In class push-in services Small group and one-to-one During the school day In class push-in services Small group and one-to-one During the school day In class push-in services Small group and one-to-one During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) *IEPTeacher for InterventionServices ● Incoming freshman -NY State ELA score ● Grades 10-12-Failing report card grade in English ● Incoming freshman -NY State Math score ● Grades 10-12 Failing report card grade in math and/or math Regents Failing report card grade in science and/or science Regents Students who have not attained social studies Regents credit after the 11th grade will take on a leadership role in a current U.S. History class. These students will be afforded the an opportunity to then retake the U.S. History Regents. 2018-19 CEP 36  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral by parent/guardian or staff member In class push-in services Small group and one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 31 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Veritas will provide our STH students with emergency supplies such as a uniform shirt, books, writing implements, at-risk counseling, tutoring, reading intervention class if needed, and special college and career outreach services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Veritas staff members will be encouraged to attend Department of Education and non-DOE professional learning workshops. Teachers will report to the administration on how they will utilize the trainings in their classroom and how they will turnkey training to their colleagues. We will employ the following strategies and activities: monitoring of new teachers, assignments through interests, elective courses, sharing of teachers’ expertise, evaluations, open-door policy. Veritas will continue to recruit teachers from local colleges such as St. John's University. In order to retain our teachers, we will provide new teachers with buddy/mentors, create formal systems for team planning and collaboration, and encourage staff to attend outside professional development opportunities. Veritas will also hold new teacher breakfasts to help build school spirit and provide support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Activities and strategies for high quality professional development for the principal and other school leaders-By June of 2019, our principal and assistant principals will attend at least 4 out of school professional learning sessions offered by the DOE or other educational entity such as the Renzulli Schoolwide Enrichment Model summer Confratute program at the University of Connecticut. Activities and strategies for high quality professional development that will be offered for all teachers to enable students to meet state standards-By June 2019, 100% of teachers will attend at least 2 out of school professional learning sessions, e.g., the University of Connecticut's Confratute summer program, on topics such as the Renzulli Schoolwide Enrichment Model program, which will help to enable students to meet state standards. In addition we at Veritas will employ the following strategies and activities: one-on-one meetings with individual PD plans, department 2018-19 CEP 40  and grade meetings and trainings, staff selection of PD, binders for all staff members, common time for trainings built into the schedule, in-house training. Professional development provided to paraprofessionals and other staff members which empowers them to support students' ability to meet the Common Core Standards-By June 2019, 100% of paraprofessionals will attend at least 2 in-school or out of school professional learning opportunities on topics such as the Renzulli Schoolwide Enrichment Model at the University of Connecticut's Confratute summer program. Paraprofessional attendance at said trainings will help them to enable students to meet state standards. By June 2019, all non-pedagogic staff members, i.e., our secretaries, Parent Coordinator, etc., will attend 1 in-house training on the Renzulli Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM), our school's theme. This training will be provided by an AP of Instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 41  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During faculty conference and department meetings, teachers will have the opportunity to voice their opinion in regard to the decision making around the use and selection of multiple assessment measures, and the professional development needed to ensure the proper use of assessment results. At said meetings teachers will be given samples of the various assessments. They will discuss the pros and cons of each measure and then decide upon a particular assessment to use with their students. The department head will then relate this information to the AP of instruction who will then in turn be responsible for providing training on the assessment chosen to ensure proper understanding of the testing results culled. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $246,666 0 $12,366 0 $4,084,807 x NA x NA x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C NA Section 5A NA Section 5A, 5B, 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 2018-19 CEP 42  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Veritas Academy believes that parental/family involvement in the education process is a vitally important factor. Parents/guardians are a child’s first educator. Our Parent Involvement Plan strives to nurture a meaningful and mutually satisfying and productive relationship between the students, parents, staff, and community-based organizations involved with Veritas Academy. Moreover, we wish for our parents and guardians to become involved and feel WELCOMED in order to help us make a difference in their children’s education. Following is a description of measures in place to ensure growing parental involvement at Veritas Academy: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students -Veritas Academy’s parents/guardians show their support for the school by participating in the Parent-Teacher Association and on the School Leadership Team, attending Curriculum Night, and Parent-Teacher conferences as well as various other school events. -Communication between parents and the school is a top priority for Veritas Academy. Parents are kept informed and involved in their children’s academic life through School Messenger, e-mails, Skedula and the school website, www.theveritasacademy.com . Parental Involvement and School Quality Veritas Academy distributes on a regular basis parent, student and staff needs assessment surveys. The results help determine areas of interest, as well as those in need of improvement or change. Technology workshops are given as per parent requests as well as on pre-determined topics such as Skedula, and College Readiness. With the assistance of administrators, staff, parents/guardians and students, Veritas helps its students not only achieve, but surpass all performance standards. 2018-19 CEP 44  Each semester, the students who have achieved Honor Roll, Outstanding Community Service and/or 100% Attendance status are celebrated during PTA assemblies. Our Student Recognition bulletin board proudly displays Honor Roll, Community Service and Perfect Attendance achievers. Veritas Academy strives to instill in its students a feeling of pride in their accomplishments in order to motivate them toward ever-increasing successes. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Veritas Academy hopes to establish and maintain strong parent/guardian, staff and student relationships which will honor and celebrate its students’ academic success, progress, attendance, and self-regulation. We want all parents/guardians to become involved in their child’s school lives and strive to become as active at school as possible. Provide a stimulating and rigorous education to help your child reach his/her highest potential. School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Strive to present the instructional material in a stimulating and informative manner. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships o Provide assessment and feedback on how your child is progressing academically. o Offer a happy and healthy school environment and be available to actively participate in your child’s education. o Maintain accurate records of any request or concern submitted by a parent. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Continue to enforce and observe the parents’ and students’ rights to privacy and confidentiality I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide outside agency information to families struggling with such issues as immigration status, substance abuse, domestic issues, depression. Parents and guardians of a child at Veritas Academy will do the following: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities o Make sure my child attends school daily and arrives promptly at 7:50 AM. o Communicate with my child as to his/her performance and play an integral role in assisting in his/her learning. o Be as involved as possible in my child’s education o Be included, when appropriate, in decision-making pertaining to his/her educational/disciplinary actions. o Check with my child for any information sent home and check website. 2018-19 CEP 45  o Be available for all parent/teacher conferences and communicate with the staff pertaining to any concerns including homework, and behavior. o Allow reasonable time for the school to respond to any request or concern I submit. o Check the Skedula online gradebook. III. Student Responsibilities Students at Veritas Academy will do the following: o Be in attendance every day and arrive by 7:50 AM. o Come to school prepared for instruction and ready and willing to learn. o Actively take part in class activities, complete all my class work and homework in a timely fashion. o Follow the directions of staff members at all times and all school rules. o Deliver all hand-outs and flyers to my parents upon receiving them. o Be kind and respectful to all staff and peers. o Wear my school shirt every day and follow the school dress code. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The ENL population that we have is very diverse in its backgrounds and needs. It ranges from students who are recent arrivals to the country to some long term ELLs. The biggest population of ELLs for us are our 9th and 10th graders. One of the areas of most concern for us, particularly as a Renzulli school, is that of social emotional learning. When the students come from other countries, it takes them some time to acculturate to a new system. We want to offer the students a space where we can address their most pressing needs in order for them to succeed. In addition to working on the basic skills of reading, writing and speaking, we have structured our program to offer a wide range of learning experiences for our students. Within our ENL population, the subgroups we have include students across the range of proficiency levels from Entering to Proficient. Another subgroup is Special education students. We also have two students who are designated as SIFE. The grade levels to be served will be 9-12th grade. Our program will include Regents Review for the following subjects: * Chemistry * Geometry * English * U.S. History * Algebra I * Global Studies To address the English needs of our ELL population, in addition to regents prep, we will be offering a writing intensive class entitled "Self-Authoring." Students will use a program that has them outline their short and long term goals as it relates to academics. The goal being to have students identify their strengths and weaknesses so that they can stay motivated throughout the four years of high school. (Self-authoring.com) Our Science teacher will be pairing up with our social worker to offer a "Tower Garden" class. In this class, students will engage in a community-related project that is centered around gardening. Another science teacher will be conducting a "No Cook" Cooking class. Students will have cooking projects with real world foods. This will provide them a great opportunity to do hands-on work. Lastly, we will be offering a music class where students learn to play an instrument, dance and ultimately work collaboratively to put on a performance. The duration of the program on Saturdays will be from 9am-12pm. There will be two sections, one taking place from 9-1025am. The other from 1030-1150am followed by pizza. During the week, we will continue to have regents prep classes for those students who are not able to attend on Saturdays. The tentative schedule during the week is Mon, Tues and Wed. The duration will be from October through December. The language of instruction will be English. We will be using ten classrooms with a maximum of 15 students/teacher. Each classroom will have at least one certified teacehr in the subject area indicated (i.e., Math, Science, English, etc). 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The sources that we have utilized to develop this program are our regents score, the data for incoming students lexile levels as well as the EDAT tool analysis. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development will take place once a week during department meetings and will be the length of one school period. The teachers that will receive the training will be the content area teachers that will be working with the ELLs. Topics that we will cover will include ENL strategies and supports, improving grammar, academic writing across content areas, SIFE status and the challenges that students face when making the transition to a new country/learning methodology. The ENL teachers will be attending PDs that are provided by DELLS as well as other DOE approved providers (we will update the list as the providers make their schedules available). In turn, we will turnkey those PDs to the staff in order to prepare the content area teachers to work with our ENL population. These PDs will discuss the needs of ENL students, both academic and socio-emotional. This means the ENL teacher working with the social worker on dealing with issues that affect our students, such as immigration. Our guidance counselors will collaborate with our staff and students on graduation requirements, culture assimilation and the socio-emotional issues that our immigrant population faces - including the expectation to pass state exams for immigrant students who are newly arrived. The schedule and duration will be ongoing as the program continues. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Many immigrant parents are not familiar with the school system and the resources that are available to them. We plan to educate parents about the entire school experience. From how many credits their children need to graduate, to the college application process. We would also be offering parents English classes in addition to technology classes where parents can learn basic computer literacy skills. Next year we will be utilizing Skedula for our grades system. We will do a PD with parents to show them how they can use it and communicate with teachers. Records will be maintained in a secured, locked office. They will be in a file cabinet that is dedicated to ELL related matters. We have partnered with Access VR to offer students who qualify an alternative path to careers. They will come in and do a PD for our parents and students and teachers. In addition, the Office of Higher Education Services Corporation will also be conducting a PD on December 4th. Also for parents, our guidance counselors have an open door policy for parents and they are able to make appointments to meet with counselors. In addition, counselors provide "college night" workshops for parents and students. During these workshops, we provide translators where we can. We will determine the exact duration of workshops and sessions as the year starts and when we have a better idea of how many parents will be attending. As of now, the components of this program are at no cost to us. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Veritas Academy Borough Queens School Number 240 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cheryl Quatrano Coach Melinda Spataro ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maximo Pichardo/Lauren Balzano Teacher/Subject Area Kathy Garzon/History Teacher/Subject Area Neysa Rodriguez/Spanish Related-Service Provider Jessica Wyllins Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Frank Racugglia Coach NA School Counselor Lisa Bongiovi Parent Beatrice Strong Parent Coordinator Connie Scalici Field Support Center Staff Member Lawrence Pendergast Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 539 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.42% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All incoming students at Veritas Academy are assessed with the New York City Performance Assessment in English. The results of this assessment are used to plan and guide instruction for both ENL and the content area teachers. The data provides a framework for which to build supports for the ELL population as the content area teachers plan their lessons. Students in push-in classes adhere to modified assessments of the content area classroom teachers. These are co-developed between the ENL and content area teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Since our program is mainly a push-in one, besides one pull-out class, there is ongoing co-planning with the ELA department. As such, the existing supports for the ELA department are extended to the ENL students since they are sitting in 2018-19 CEP 53  those classes as well. We have no large size ENL classes since our student population is rather small (~530 students). Our ENL population isn't big enough to have dedicated classes for only ELLs. Our pull-out class consists of four students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs is reflected firstly on how the students are testing on the NYSESLAT exam and whether they go up in levels or test out. Secondly, we evaluate success by doing periodic assessments and noting what progress has taken place. One additional assessment tool we use is Achieve 3000. This can be tailored to the students' proficiency level and adjusted accordingly. Additionally, as the ENL teacher, the work I do with my students has to reflect on their content area classes because I work on improving their literacy skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The majority of our ENL population operates under a push-in model of instruction. As such, the interventions we put in place are in line with those classes in which the students are struggling in, albeit with supports specific to the ENL population. In conjuction with the ELA teachers, we provide our ELLs with all of the same opportunities their pus-in classmates receive when academic interventions need to be implemented. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In order to evaluate and inform our ELL programs (push-in and pull-out), we use data from the NYSESLAT, ELA class data as well as ELA regents. In addition, we use the EDAT tool to assess how our ELLs are performing in relation to their non-ELL peers. The goal of our push-in model, which is the overwhelming majority of our student body, is to have our ELL population exposed to the same rigors of the classroom as their non-ELL peers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL department works closely with the ELA department. We have regular, ongoing, departmental meetings in which we examine student work and discuss strategies in which to address any academic issues. We discuss best practices and come up with strategies that we can implement across the board to aid our student population. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The program at Veritas Academy includes integrated and one standalone class. In the integrated classes the ELLs are mixed in with the general education students. The ENL teachers pushes in with the content area teacher so as to follow a co-teaching model. The Math teacher is dually certified and she provides ELL supports to the ENL students. The integrated classes consist of students that are in the same grade. Most push-in classes are grouped heterogeneously. For the pull-out class, it is also similarly mixed with differentiated instruction, but the only levels that are eligible for pull-out are Entering and Emerging. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 54  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are programmed to meet their mandated amount of instructional minutes by the ENL coordinator and the programming coordinator. All students are programmed according to the minutes they are mandated to receive based on their proficiency levels. For Entering and Emerging students this translates to 540 and 360 mins/week, respectively. This includes both push-in and pull-out instruction. Push-in instruction takes place in ELA classes and Mathematics. For students in the Transitioning and Expanding levels, all of their minutes are programmed as push-in. Some of these students will be receving ENL instruction in ELA and or Math. Commanding students continue to receive ENL instruction for two years after testing at Commanding. They are programmed for two periods of instruction per week. When possible, we service them in ELA classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers pushes into the core content area (ELA) classes. Using a variety of co-teaching models, the ENL teachers and the content area teachers deliver the content to students in as much of an equitable way as possible. All content areas are taught in English with the ENL teacher providing supports in the student's native language when possible. If the student's native language is different than that of the ENL teacher, the teacher will bring in supports in that student's language as they relate to the lesson. The core content is delivered in varied ways to suit the needs of the students. Some of the teaching models utilized are: Station teaching, where teachers divide content and students so as to teach to small groups. Alternative Teaching lends itself well when students need differentiation or there are behavior problems. Lastly, Teaming is a frequently used model to deliver core instruction. Some students respond better when they see equal cooperation between two teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have only a standalone ENL program. We are neither a dual language school or a TBE school. Assessment in home language, other than the Spanish-Lab assessment test, is not something that we are currently implementing based on our current program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For SIFE students we implement the resources offered through EngageNY. Newcomers receive special emphasis on vocabulary building. The instruction is centered on pre-taugh vocabulary words and phrases, such as linking words. We implement the use of various graphic organizers and sentence starters. In addition, they are taught basic strategies for managing the English language. They are provided with a dictionary as well as a journal notebook in which they are to record any new words that they come across and do not understand so that they build a lexical vocabulary. A newcomer with very little L2 is given small group, pullout instruction. Developing ELLs are taught through word banks using linking words and phrases and how to incorporate them in claims and counterclaims. Additionally, they work on building their comprehension of the language by engaging in lessons that activate prior knowledge, connects their L1 with their L2 by having them recognize cognates. Our population of Long Term ELLs are predominantly self-contained students. AS such, they receive integrated instruction in small class settings. The instruction for them focuses on strengthening their basic 2018-19 CEP 55  comprehension skills by providing them with strategies to cope with their work. The emphasis with these students is in unpacking the classwork in consumable portions to ensure the greatest possible understanding before they get on with the task of the class. Former ELLs are generally fully immerse. They work independently and display their knowledge of text by writing essays and being able to cite evidence and support their claims. There is much less emphasis on using sentence starters and graphic organizers serve to organize ideas rather than to bridge language differences. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The Veritas Academy ICT program provides students with disabilities to travel and interact with their general education peers in all classes while receiving support from the ICT teacher as well as the contetn area teacher. The ENL teacher supports ELL-SWDs by pushing-in to their English language Arts class. During this time students are usually grouped heterogeneously in order to create a setting in which the students can perform to the best of their abilities and learn from each other. The self-contained teacher and the ENL teacher collaborate to plan lessons that are well suited for the learning styles and needs of each student. This small classroom setting is a positive environment that fosters academic and social success for individual students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The collaborative effort made by the content area teacher, ICT teacher, and ENL teacher foster an environment that is conducive to learning and academic growth. Time during team planning meetings are allocated for these teachers to look over and assess student IEP goals. Each student's IEP goal and action plan is reviewed on a monthly basis in order to ensure that ELLs attain English proficiency. During tests, all accommodations in the ELL-SWDs are always met. These accommodations range from extra time, scribe or a specific testing environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas include small group instruction, peer tutoring, differentiation, AIS services, and after school programs. Most content area teachers offer after or before school help for students. When an ELL student makes use of this support, the ENL teacher works in collaboration with the content area teacher in either providing supports that the content area teacher can use or working alongside the content area teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will look at the results of our student interest-a-lyzer and determine which are the best programs to institute in our school. We currently offer after school activities such as chess, which give ELLs an opportunity to interact with general ed students where they can practice their conversation skills in a non-formal environment. This year we have implemented Achieve 3000 as another tool from which to gather data from. We have also started using Rosetta Stone with our Emerging and Entering students as well as others we feel could benefit from it. For next year, we plan to institute a pilot program utilizing a writing intensive tool, call Self-authoring, that we feel will serve as a great way to establish a roadmap - particularly for the incoming freshmen. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of the after school programs are also available to ELLs. Our school is housed in a building with two other schools and many of the teams are comprised from students of all three schools. Our ELLs participate in all sports that are offered, such as Soccer, Volleyball and Baseball. We provide the ELLs with access to the enrollment process to join sports teams and after school clubs. When sign up posters are posted, they are translated in the languages of the students we have in the building. During periodic progress meetings, we also discuss all of the programs the school has available and how they can sign 2018-19 CEP 56  up for them. Through Title III funds, ELLs are offered before and after school enrichment. On Saturdays, parents of Immigrant students are offered English classes as well as computer literacy classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a myriad of instructional materials. Our Renzulli model is centered around a technology based system and website that supports and enhances the learning that is taking place in the school is also used to support ELLs. Our teachers have websites set up where they can provide students with enrichment supports. Engrade is used to post assignments where students can complete them online. Parents, conversely, can regularly check on their children's progress 24/7 through endgrade as well. Students also utilize Castle Learning to receive and submit assignments online. As the ENL teacher I use technology heavily during my lessons. Any concept that we are covering I illustrate it on the whiteboard. We use google maps when we talk about a city or town or country. All the top newspapers are also utilized at some degree in both the content areas as well as standalone ENL classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The native language development of our ELLs is supported by our faculty members that are fluent in the student's language. Students use their native language/English dictionaries in each content area. Students are also encouraged to read books in their native language. The most prominent language is Spanish. When the students come in as a new arrival, the student is assessed with the Spanish Lab exam. All classes are taught in English and the instruction is delivered in English. When a student needs to be assessed in their home language, we can support Spanish in-house and for other languages we would have to use translation services when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. There is ongoing dialogue and collaboration between departments. As a small school, all teachers share best practices and any concerns regarding academic interventions. The ENL coordinator ensures that student's are programmed into the appropriate class and are receiving their mandated minutes and are being met with the services they require in their IEPs. During IEP meetings, the services that students need are discussed with the parents and any concerns are addressed to ensure they are receiving all required services and resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are housed in a building with two other high schools. We have a designated number of classrooms that are assigned to us. Our ELLs only share resources when it comes to the library and the lunch room. There is not ongoing cooperation that takes place, in terms of sharing instructional or academic resources, within the three schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The newly enrolled ELLs are given more choices for their summer reading assignments. First year students are introduced to second year students in a casual setting. They take the role of mentors and have a support group where second year students discuss their first year experiences and give new students a tour of the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All Veritas students are offered Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 57  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Through DELLS, all ENL teachers participate in the Professional Development opportunities they present. In turn, those PDs are turned key back to the school staff. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Records are kept in each respective teacher's binder. The teacher who attended the PD has to fill out a form outlining what the PD was about as well as keeping a record of it in their Educator Portfolio. Veritas Academy provides a variety of workshops to help teachers increase their professional knowledge on how to be more supportive of English Language Learners, strategies to improve instruction in all content areas and embracing cultural diversity to improve learning. Teachers attend in-house professional development and are encouraged to attend outside professional development sessions throughout the year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are kept abreast of their kids' progress on a quarterly basis. This ensures that there are no big surprises down the line. Many of our parents cannot be available during school hours and they prefer to have a phone conversation instead of a live meeting. In these phone meetings we discuss the student's progress in all areas as they relate to ENL. Most of our students are Spanish speaking, as is our ENL teacher. We ensure that we have a translator if we are meeting with parents who speak other languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We actively seek parent involvement among all of the paretns and our students. Providing them with a variety of opportunities for participating is our main goal. The administration, teachers, Parent Coordinator, and our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) work cooperatively in reaching out to all parents and parents of ELLs are given equal opportunities and access to all activities. Some activities include workshops, meetings, parent breakfast with an open discussion format for parents to present questions and concerns. To facilitate these discussions, our staff members who speak different languages are invited to assist in the translation. When parents indicate that they like to receive correspondence in their native language, we have any notices or phone calls translated in those languages. 2018-19 CEP 58  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cheryl Quatrano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Veritas Academy School DBN: 25Q240 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Cheryl Quatrano Title Principal Frank Raccuglia Assistant Principal Connie Scalici Parent Coordinator Maximo Pichardo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Beatrice Strong Parent Neysa Rodriguez/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Michael Eisenberg/Music Teacher/Subject Area Melinda Spataro N/A Coach Coach Lisa Bongiovi School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Lawrence Pendergast Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 N/A 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q240 School Name: Veritas Academy Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Maximo Pichardo ENL Coordinator NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. It is the school’s desire and expectation that all parents, including our non-English speaking parents, acquire excellent access to our school’s general information and their children’s educational options appropriately and in a timely matter. Assessment was conducted through the Home Language Identification Surveys for all students whose HLIS indicated speaking a language other than English at home. This was also conducted through conversations with classroom teachers and by the ENL teacher during parent/student interviews at the beginning of the year. Based on these findings, both the school staff and the administration have agreed that both written and oral interpretation is necessary for these groups. The parent Coordinator works closely with our School Counselor and ENL teacher to establish procedures and policies to meet the needs of our Limited-English Proficiency parents by ensuring that all documents sent home are marked with a translation stamp indicating the importance of the document and the need for translation. This translation stamp is in Korean, Spanish and Chinese. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Bengali Arabic Chinese Korean Italian Spanish English English Chinese English English Indonesian Indonesian Urdu Tagalog English Nepali Pashto Urdu English English English Pashto 90% 100% 100% 100% 100% Italian 100% 100% 100% 100% English 100% Spanish English English Chinese English Italian English Urdu Tagalog English English Pashto 90% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Calendars Monthly Parent/teacher Conf. Twice a year NYS Testing dates Twice a year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE Resources or Google Translate language isn't readily available In-house for languages we have on staff. Google Translate. DOE Resources/in-house/Google Translate 2018-19 CEP 63  HLIS Entitlement Letters Misc. Announcements Ongoing basis Ongoing Ongoing DOE Website has most frequent occurring languages translated Same as above In-house/Google Translate/Outside Vendor 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conferences Twice a year In-house, outside vendors. IEP Meetings Curriculum night Parent Orientation Ongoing Once a year In-house when possible and outside translation services In-house, translated documents September/Ongoing In-house, vendors 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We would use the over-the-phone translation services and in-house services since our most frequent language is Spanish both from a staff and parent population standpoint. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We apprise all staff, especially new staff, of the Chancellor's regulation at the beginning of the school year. We do this in the form of a mini-PD where we share out the resources that we have developed for our students as well as those provided by the DOE. We provide the staff with the roster of all students and their home languages so that the staff is aware of their language needs. When a staff member has to communicate with a parent, we ensure that translation services are available either in person or using over the phone translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 64   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school fulfills parental notification requirements as stated in Chancellor’s regulation A-663, Section VII, by posting notices of available services in key locations throughout the school. These include, but are not limited to: the main entrance, the main office, and the office of the School Counselor. A welcome sign in many languages is posted by the main entrance indicating key people such as the parent Coordinator document in the appropriate languages, indicating the importance of the document and the request for translation or interpretation. The school instruction based documents, translation information and other parent related information and guides. The school will provide each parent who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights to receive these services. Specific instructions on how to obtain such services at our school will be included in this correspondence. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At each meeting points (parent-teacher-conference, IEP meetings, curriculum night, school events, field trips, etc), we will informally survey the parents in order to gather feedback. We will also send parents service related surveys to gage which areas we can further improve upon. 2018-19 CEP 65 
