2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q242 School Name: P.S. 242 LEONARD P. STAVISKY EARLY CHILDHOOD SCHOOL Principal: JILL PRITCHARD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Leonard P. Stavisky Early Childhood School 25Q242 PK, K, 1, 2, 3 School Number (DBN): 25Q242 29-66 137 TH Street Flushing, N.Y. 11354 718-445-2902 718-939-7751 Phone Number: Fax: Jill Pritchard jpritch2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: JillPritchard Email Address: Giannoula Panagiotopolous Annie Lai Roseanne DiPiano N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 281 7605 Phone Number: 718 939 7751 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens Plaza North LawrencePendergast Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917 ) 225-2020 Phone Number: (917) 225-2020 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jill Pritchard, Principal, GiannoulaPangiotopoulos , UFT Chapter Leader Annie Lai, PTAPresident SabrinaSaraceni Robyn Brue Alvin Hung *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joanna Robles Louise Ding Elizabeth Calderon QianqianYu Julianne Casey RoseAnneDiPiano Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher/SLTChairperson Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 242Q is a unique learning community, where dedication to academic excellence and personal development is provided in a child-centered environment, advancing the best possible early childhood education. We encourage each child to feel secure and to develop his/her individual style and talents in our heterogeneous classrooms. Emphasis is placed on meeting individual needs through multiple pathways and collaborative rigorous instruction in a cooperative setting. We emphasize the importance of emotional and social development as supported by staff, families and the community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 242 is a unique and inviting early childhood school where diversity is celebrated and students excel. Our school is located in the Linden Hill section of Flushing and serves a population of 400 students in pre-kindergarten through grade three. The school population draws from the entirety of District 25. Our teacher teams meet regularly to foster coherent standards-based instruction throughout the school. Grade teams are provided the resources they need to collaborate often, such as three common preps a week, access to technology in all classrooms, and new and updated materials. All of our teachers are continually learning and collaborating to provide the richest educational experience for all students. All are highly qualified, licensed, and certified. They each have more than five years of teaching experience, and hold a Masters Degree or higher. Our engaging arts and writing curriculum support student creativity and personal expression. Some of the special initiatives we would like to highlight is our collaboration with Mr. Alastair King and Together in Dance to provide a rich arts curriculum where music, dance, and visual artists work with students and teachers in ongoing classroom based residency programs. Monthly performances add richness and diversity to the curriculum. Our many years collaborating with Columbia University’s Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) has created a strong reading and writing curriculum. We work to create standards-aligned tasks that invite critical thinking, across all content areas. Our hard working staff is dedicated to providing a safe, nurturing, and intellectually stimulating environment. The goal is for every child, including English as a New Language learners and students with special needs, to achieve high academic standards, while also developing a positive self image and becoming good citizens. Administration and teachers work together, and with parents, to implement highly effective, standards-based, balanced literacy, math, science, social studies, arts, and physical education instructional programs that maximize student engagement and learning. Our shared vision is to continuously grow together as a vibrant community of learners focused on student achievement. Our mission is to ensure that every child and adult in our community has the opportunity and the resources to do their best and to achieve high levels of personal and professional success. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The families we serve represent many cultures and languages, predominantly Asian and Hispanic, many of whom are recent immigrants. Our community is international with almost 70% of our students coming from homes where English is spoken as a second language. Almost one half of our incoming students receive extra support for learning English. Adding to our diversity, 17% of our students have Individualized Education Plans and receive expert academic and related services support during the school day. At least one class on every grade is an Integrated Team Teaching class serving students with special needs together with general education students in an integrated setting. Our commitment to differentiated instruction supports students of all ability levels in every classroom. Intervention experts provide academic support and/or enrichment during the school-day and in after-school programs to meet the individual needs of every student so that each has the opportunity to achieve their personal best. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  During the 2017/2018 school-year, P.S.242Q made the most progress in the area of Collaborative Teachers; in which the structure was revised to include vertical teams, each with a specific CEP goal-aligned focus. Our main focus was to improve the use of classroom, grade level, and school-wide data to monitor progress, and make school-wide decisions. Teachers worked within their grade level and vertical teams, to refine cohesive benchmark assessments that will track progress throughout the grades in the school. Teacher teams then met to analyze student data, notice common trends, plan small group instruction, and modify upcoming curriculum based on student needs, aligned with the Common Core Standards. To accomplish these goals our Professional Learning Committee collaboratively created a Professional Learning Plan based on teacher identified strengths and needs. Teachers participated in professional learning teams where they engaged in cycles of collaborative inquiry. Protocols for analyzing data and identifying problems of practice for study were taught and practiced throughout each cycle resulting in improved instruction and student progress. After analyzing the end of the year data, it was evident that our system for monitoring and tracking student progress was successful and increased student performance; as there was an increase in students reaching benchmark and above benchmark levels in June, 2018. Our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family Community Ties, specifically in the area of Social Emotional Learning. The goal is for teachers to develop complex tasks for students to engage in. It is our goal that by having rigorous tasks embedded into our daily practice, we will build student autonomy. In an effort to reach this goal, teachers will be provided with professional development around this topic. We will engage in a school-wide initiative to commonly define, engagement and autonomy. Key stakeholders will regularly participate in learning rounds, and create feedback for the staff. This feedback will inform our future professional development. We have partnered with Literacy Support Systems , with Maureen Morriss as our consultant. In addition, there will be an overhaul in our communication system. We will be using one systematic way to communicate school-wide, class-wide, and individual messages. This will be accomplished through the use of ParentSquare. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q242 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 392 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 9 8 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 5 15 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 65.0% % Attendance Rate 53.6% % Reduced Lunch 32.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 14.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.15 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 81.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 45 15 95.8% 10.7% 12.0% 3.6% 76.3% 0.8% 2 0% 9.9 88.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 Mathematics Assessment Data shows that 88% of students are proficient in Math, 82% of students are proficient in ELA As indicated by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 79% of teachers say that students feel challenged, 64%of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well, and 64% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. School administered Professional Learning Survey indicates that 47% of teachers seek Math Professional Learning opportunities. Teacher perception data shows that staff sees a need for support in curriculum development, as indicated by the feedback generated during a professional learning session, where we unpacked each school goal. STRENGTHS: When reviewing the school-wide data for the school year 2018, it was evident that all students showed growth from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, as evidenced on benchmark assessments. The 2018 Mathematics Assessment Data shows that 88% of students are proficient in Math, indicating a 2% increase from 2017. The ELA proficiency increased 18% points from 64% in 2017, to 82% in 2017. DATA TRENDS (source & year) As a team, administrators and teachers reviewed summative assessments in ELA and math for Grades K-3. We also reviewed teacher observation data, through both a qualitative lens, indicating Domain 3 as the area of the Danielson Framework upon which to focus) and qualitative data, indicating a need for the development of complex tasks and engaging activities for all learners. PRIORITY NEED: 2018-19 CEP 13  It was determined that there is a need for professional development in the area of development of complex tasks. That professional development must be targeted, comprehensive , and made available to all teachers. Sustainability and accountability will be maintained, as the work involved is continuous. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in professional learning to build pedagogical practices that lead to student autonomy, by supporting student engagement in complex tasks, requiring critical thinking. This will be evidenced by a 5% increase in proficiency on the NYS ELA Test, NYS Mathematics Test, and TC Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop school-wide common definition of what constitutes a complex task, requiring critical thinking. All Teachers September 2018 Administration, Educational Consultant All teachers will work together in teams to analyze the learning tasks on their grade-level. Teachers will use an evaluative tool, such as the Tri-State Rubric, to determine the level of complexity of selected tasks. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Educational Consultant Teachers will engage in professional learning focused on development of complex tasks and how to facilitate learning and student autonomy through use of these tasks. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Educational Consultant Teachers will make revisions to and develop selected tasks in units of study to support student autonomy by engaging in complex tasks. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Educational Consultant All students September 2018- June 2019 All teachers, Administration All students will engage in complex tasks, throughout each unit of study. They will be taught through whole class lessons, as well as strategically planned small groups based on data gathered through the standards aligned assessment and continuous formative assessment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At September "Meet the Teacher" meetings, parents will be introduced (by their child's teacher) to the curriculum for their child's grade. They will be taught how to access the standards online, as well as given additional resources to support their child. At November and March Parent Teacher Conferences, teachers will share results of the standards aligned assessments, and supports to help their child make progress. Each month, parents receive monthly newsletters updating them on what specific subject area instruction their child will be receiving that month. There will also be Parents as Learning Partners events, where parents can watch their child learn in the classroom, followed by a teacher-facilitated workshop on how to help reinforce learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom and ENL Teachers, paraprofessionals, student teachers, and administration; instructional materials including supplements to the instructional programs, online video and other resources, charts, sentence strips, markers, pocket charts, etc.; per diem funding for substitute teachers, as well as weekly schedule adjustments to accommodate teacher study and classroom and school inter-visitation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, frequent, formative classroom observations and review of curriculum maps and lesson plans, including complex tasks will document that all teachers are planning specifically to meet the needs of learners of all levels. An assessment calendar was created to help monitor progress in this area. Benchmark data will be input 3 times per year (beginning, middle, and end of school-year). A midpoint target of .5 (1-4 scale) average increase in narrative on-demand writing pieces from September to January, an increase of 5% of those performing on grade-level TC Running Records expectations, and an average increase of 3% on interim math assessments, will be used to progress monitor. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYS ELA Test, NYS Mathematics Test, and TC Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 242 believes that social-emotional learning is essential to the personal and academic growth of our staff and students. We focus on educating the whole child as opposed to just academics. Based on parent and teacher surveys from 2017-2018, faculty observations, and the expectations set forth by the chancellor, we have decided to align a goal to social emotional learning. OORS incident reports indicate an increase of over 200%. School Survey data: 75% of the teachers responded that their students behave well in class when the teacher isn’t watching. 75% of teachers say that students pay attention when they are supposed to. As reported on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 75% of the teachers responded that their students behave well in class when the teacher isn’t watching. This is a decrease of 10% from the prior year. Under the social-emotional component on the NYC School Survey, 92% of teachers responded that a lot of the adults teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (ie: controlling their emotions, managing their thinking, behavior and feelings. ) Strengths: When reviewing the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, it was evident that there is a partnership between parents and teachers in the education of children at our school. Over 98% of parents felt that there is a trusting relationship between the staff and the parents. Priority Needs: Feedback from the students, in both a student discussion forum and on an SEL survey given to Grade 3 students, showed that there is a need to foster student access to adults, self-regulation and independence. Students, especially in an early childhood school, need to learn to productively work through challenging social and academic situations. The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey indicated a need by teachers for support in providing students the tools they need to monitor their own behavior. Teachers also expressed a high need for Social Emotional Learning opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will engage in professional development opportunities focused on incorporating researched -based practices to support positive student behavior. This will be evidenced by a 10% decrease by June when compared to OORS incident reports (Levels 3 and above) from 2018. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support the Social Emotional Learning Team, which will consist of faculty members including teachers, paraprofessionals and the guidance counselor. All Staff Engage in ongoing professional learning in collaboration with NYC Office of School Health All staff Create an emotionally supportive environment through various positive behavior strategies including Ruler, High 5's, Character Book of the Month, greetings, etc Students Meet monthly with the Admin Team. Student emotional and physical well-being will be addressed as part of the responsibility of the team. Students Engage in ongoing professional learning in collaboration with High Functioning Families All Staff September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Administration, OSH personnel All staff Safety Team Members Administration, consultants from HFF 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to participate in workshops related to social emotional health. Parents as Learning Partners sessions will continue to integrate SEL as a focus topic. Session will take place in October 2018, December 2018, January 2019, February 2019, and April 2019. Written communication will include information and resources for parents. Marguerite Choudhry, Parent Coordinator, and RoseAnne DiPiano are responsible for the implementation of ParentSquare, our school -family communication tool. Jill Pritchard will oversee these initiatives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will have a Social Emotional Team, who will design professional development opportunities for staff and parents. This team will coordinate with community organizations to provide resources and information to our school 2018-19 CEP 19  commuinity. They will coordinate initiatives to promote positive behavior. OTPS funding will be used to fund outside agency supports. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 and June 2019, teachers will be asked if they were provided adequate training in this area. Adjustments to professional learning, as well as planning classroom visitations and feedback, will be made based on the data collected. This will be evidenced by a 5% decrease by February, when compared to OORS incident reports (Levels 3 and above) from 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys and OORS incident reporting data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DATA USED: School Survey, Grade 3 ELA Instructional Report, June 2017 TCRWP Running Record Levels 1. Strengths: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, in the area of Collaborative Teaching, 86% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. 97% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at our school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. 93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at our school, teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate our teaching with instruction at other grade levels, and 97% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. Teachers met voluntarily during common planning times. They engaged in cycles of inquiry with grade-level and vertical teams. 2. Priority Needs: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, in the area of Collaborative Teaching, only 57% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. As measured by the end of the 2018 school year Teacher’s College Running Records, 70% met grade level standards, making reading instruction a priority need. It was noted that a performance gap exists in the area of gender in ELA (Females 97% proficiency, males, 63% proficiency) and by ethnicity in Math (Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific islander 95% proficiency, Hispanic or Latinos 69% proficiency Based on this data, we believe that the embedded practice of teacher collaboration in our school should be supported by engaging teachers in three focused inquiry cycles around improving teacher practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 21  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade level teacher teams will have engaged in professional cycles of learning around engagement, with a particular focus on pedagogical practices that elicit student autonomy. This will be measured by a 5% decrease in the achievement gap of targeted subgroups on the NYS Mathematics assessment. Two inquiry cycles will be dedicated to the development of rigorous mathematics units of study, in alignment with Next Generation Standards, across all grades. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Core Team teachers and administration will meet monthly to: -analyze school wide data to assess student, class, grade and school-wide progress in all content areas. They will plan professional learning, INCLUDING 2 CYCLES OF INQUIRY IN MATHEMATICS, to support improved teacher practice in analyzing data and planning for and implementing complex tasks. based on data guided by Danielson Framework elements 1e Designing Coherent Instruction and #c Engaging Students in Learning Grade level teams of teachers will meet at least weekly to: - analyze student assessment data by looking at student work samples to identify strengths and areas of need. - revise instructional plans based on those areas of strength/need, and to assess growth Educational consultant, Maureen Morriss, will provide professional development to all teachers. Topics will include, but are not limited to design of instruction, planning, strong practices, assessment, curriculum mapping, and targeting needs of groups and individuals. All teachers will have a chance to work with the staff developer during one of the PL cycles. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and all teachers All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and all teachers All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At September "Meet the Teacher" meetings, parents will be introduced (by their child's teacher) to the curriculum for their child's grade. They will be taught how to access the common core standards online, as well as given additional resources to support their child. At November and March PT Conferences, teachers will share math practices and student progress data.They will be given supports to help their child make progress. Each month, parents receive monthly newsletters updating them on what specific math instruction their child will be receiving that month. There will also be an Academic Engagement Parents as Learning Partners, where parents can watch their child learn in the classroom, followed by a teacher-given workshop on how to help reinforce learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and administration will receive training in the preparation for Algebra for All. In addition, teachers will work with an educational consultant to provide guidance on inquiry, systems and pedagogy. Technological support including laptops, Smart Boards, IPads for teacher use and support using applications including Google Docs and Confer App, etc. online video and other resources; per diem funding for substitute teachers, as well as schedule adjustments to accommodate teacher on and off-site study and classroom and school inter-visitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will input their math assessment data onto Google Drive, at pre-determined points in the year according to the assessment calendar. Teachers will meet to collaboratively look at this data to identify trends and patterns in areas of strength and areas of need. In February 2019, teachers will collaboratively analyze the most current data to determine that each student, class, and grade is on track to meet end of year grade level performance. This will allow teachers the opportunity to modify their unit plans and instruction to ensure that all students are meeting the benchmarks. Utilizing flexible grouping, students will take part in rigorous tasks appropriate for their level and or needs-including ELLs and SWD’s. This data analyzing will be periodically done at specific points throughout the year so that all students’ needs will be consistently met. Schedules will be reviewed regularly to ensure the maintenance of availability of common planning for all teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By June 2019, there will be evidence of modifications to curriculum to include complex tasks. This evidence will also be captured in observation reports (Component 1e – Designing Coherent instruction and 3c-Engaging Students in Learning ) according to the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 100% of teachers responded that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school. 89% of teachers agreed that the principal/school leaders participate in instructional planning, up from 54% the previous year. Although 93% of teachers report that the principal encourages feedback, 79% of teachers indicated that they have influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials used in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will identify and communicate initiatives and modifications to better support staff in the delivery of instruction and social emotional well being. This will be informed by a system collaboratively designed by the SLT in which staff will be given the opportunity to provide regular feedback to school leadership. Attainment of this goal will be measured by a 10% increase positive response in the category- Teacher Influence. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School vision and goals presented to staff All staff Revised goals will be presented to SLT for review and further revisions. SLT September 5, 2018 October 2018 Revised goals presented to PTA and staff SLT-designed surveys Parents and staff October 2018 All staff September, February, June Administration Administration Administration SLT Members Weekly newsletter to staff (The Grapevine) All staff Ongoing Jill Pritchard 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At September "Meet the Teacher" meetings, parents will be introduced (by their child's teacher) to the curriculum for their child's grade. They will be taught how to access the common core standards online, as well as given additional resources to support their child. At November and March PT Conferences, teachers will share results of the on demand writing samples, and supports to help their child make progress. Each month, parents receive monthly newsletters updating them on what specific writing instruction their child will be receiving that month. There will also be a math Parents as Learning Partners, where parents can watch their child learn in the classroom, followed by a teacher-given workshop on how to help reinforce learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Technological support including laptops, ParentSquare, Smart Boards, IPads for teacher use and support using communication applications including Google Docs, website reconfiguration, online video and other resources; translation services will be provided for in-person and written communication. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 27  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An interim survey, with content aligned with the School Survey will be distributed to parents and staff in early February. Indicators will show progress toward the CEP goal of 5% increase in indicated area. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC DOE School Survey, Teacher and parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS242 is a school that prides itself on always having its doors open to welcome parents and families. Families participate in monthly Parents as Learning Partners classroom lessons and workshops centered around different academic areas. In addition, they are invited into the classrooms for celebrations, art shows, and various other activities, assemblies, and events throughout the year. Translation is provided to help improve communication with the families of our diverse school community. There have been noted issues with inconsistency of translation practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve involvement of our families and community. The implementation of ParentSquare will provide school staff, families and the community with access to communicate regarding school and class information. We will provide increased language access in order to prioritize family involvement and promote active participation of our diverse community, especially members of traditionally under-represented groups. This will be evidenced by an 85% positive response rate on a school-based survey, on questions related to school-family communication. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will designate dates for a quarterly newsletter, available in English, Chinese, Korean, and Spanish, to be distributed to parents. The principal will write a quarterly newsletter to families to provide them with important information, school news, and major events. Families September 2018 Administration Families September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Administration and technology teacher will establish revisions to school website to increase accessing of website by families. Families September 2018 Technology Teacher, Administration Interim parent survey will be distributed to gather data regarding access to information, communication, and participation in PTA meetings and events. Families January 2019 Parent Coordinator School website will be revised in order to be more comprehensive, engaging, applicable, resulting in parents accessing the website for pertinent information. Families September 2018 – June 2019 Technology Teacher, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnerships with Korea Tae-Kwon Do, Alastair Musical Theater Residency, Cultural After School Adventures, Together in Dance, and CAPA After-School Program on site Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ParentSquare yearly subscription, Interpretation and translation services, teachers, and administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor progress, at each PTA meeting and event, sign-ins will be collected and attendance numbers will be tracked in order to determine increase in participation. Outreach will be monitored to make sure that 100% of parents are reachable through ParentSquare. . Parent surveys will be distributed and analyzed to make revisions to our communication procedures and access to information, based upon parent feedback. Teachers will collect formative data in person, during parent teacher conferences and parent engagement meetings, regarding parent satisfaction pertaining to school communication. Additionally, success will be noted by having additional parents contribute in leadership roles, such as participation on the SLT. ParentSquare data will be reviewed weekly and contact will be made to anyone requiring updates. As a mid-point check in, parents will be asked to fill out a short survey in alignment with the School Survey. This will be distributed electronically in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ParentSquare weekly reports, Additional parents in key decision-making roles, parent response rate on the school survey; Attendance Sign-in documents from PTA events and meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendations Screening Tool (TCRWP RR and word lists,) Writing Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier 1 Tier 1 Guided Reading, strategy groups, partner and peer group work, one on one Tier 2 small group-3-5 max Tier 3 One on one, small group, 2 students max In classroom, during Literacy Block, by teacher and AIS provider. Duration: all year After 6 weeks, students will be identified for Tier 2. Tier 2 3-5x a week, 20-30 minutes, mostly out of classroom and during tutorial Duration: 9-12 weeks or less Tier 3 5x a week, 30 minutes Duration: 12-20 weeks RTI Model of Intervention according to School’s Action Plan, based on Universal Screening and benchmark level (TC assessments) Tier 1- Core Instruction, differentiated instruction to meet the needs of at least 80% of the children in the class Tier 2-Children that have received a 2 or 1 on overall literacy assessments.- Fountas And Pinnell (LLI), and related reading materials, Fundations Tier 3- Individualized and customized intervention provided to students in a smaller group (1:1 or 1:2) with greater frequency and duration. -Fountas and Pinnell (LLI) and related reading materials, 2018-19 CEP 32  Fundations, Reading Recovery Those students not making significant progress at Tier 3 are referred for Special Ed services Use of manipulatives guided practice Flexible grouping, small group strategy instruction, 1 on 1, peer instruction Within Math Block during the day, tutorial repeated directions Vocabulary cards small group reading reinforcement of content Vocabulary cards small group reading Flexible grouping, small group strategy instruction, 1 on 1, peer instruction Within science period during the day, tutorial Flexible grouping, small group strategy instruction, 1 on 1, peer instruction Within social studies period during the day, tutorial reinforcement of content Mathematics Science Social Studies Investigations, Math Unit Assessments, EngageNY tasks Science Unit Assessments Science Journal Passport to Social Studies Unit Assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Recommendations through the RTI Process, PPT Process, or Crisis Intervention Team Behavior strategies Conflict resolution strategies and procedures During the school day or tutorial Small group or individual Sessions to address behavior issues and practice strategies. Classroom lessons to address whole class issues. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) none 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34 Students in temporary housing will be provided with items such as school supplies, glasses, books, school trip funding, and any other items deemed necessary. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 242 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 242 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 242 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g. Meet the Teacher, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement time, etc. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on previous NYSESLAT data, most of our ELL students show a greater need for listening and reading skills. Analysis of the NYSITELL results show a greater need in the speaking modality for new students coming in to Kindergarten. Our Title III After school program will be conducted from November 1, 2018 to February 7, 2019, providing small group and individualized instruction in English for our Multi-lingual Language Learners one day per week (Thursdays) from 2:20 until 3:50 (18 ninety minute sessions) for our first grade ENL students. The students that will be served in this program will be all ELL/MLL students in the school. Our program focuses on oral language development and reading and writing in the content areas based on data from the 2018 NYSESLAT using the following supplemental materials (supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction) including: National Geographic guided reading books, Rigby "On Our Way to English" program, the Mondo Oral Language program "Let's Talk About It", Continental Press "New York ELLs", and developmentally appropriate songs, chants and enrichment materials from the "Imagine Learning" Program teacher access. There are bilingual books accessible in each Title III classroom and bilingual staff members provide home language support. Each teacher will work with ten to fifteen students utilizing the workshop model in grade level and proficiency based groups. The teachers will use direct instruction and flexible grouping to support the students. They will begin by teaching a short minilesson followed by a I do, we do, you do model. An ENL teacher will rotate at forty-five to sixty minute intervals to provide push-in instruction in the first grade classrooms to team teach with non ENL/Bilingual certified teachers (three content area teachers) because this program runs for ninety minutes. One ENL teacher will serve her own students in grade 1 and the another group will be served by a certified bilingual teacher. Student progress is measured using Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) ELA assessments, teacher created oral language rubrics, and NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT scores. Title III After-school teachers confer with ENL providers and classroom teachers to gather data and information in order to design and provide individualized instruction that supports each student in being successful in the classroom setting. ENL Teachers work with teachers in this program to analyze specific data using the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to design effective instructional programs and or interventions for the students attending this program. Teachers who will work this program will maintain folders of student work as evidence of learning. A supervising school administrator will work with a bilingual staff member to collect and maintain agenda and attendance records from teachers during each session. Program notification and other letters will be sent out in parents' preferred languages translated by bilingual staff members. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III teachers will meet for half an hour weekly to engage in professional development via study groups to support best practices in teaching English as a New Language beginning on November 1, 2018 and ending on February 7, 2019. This will be per-session work. The supervising school administrator will maintain records of attendance and agendas at these professional development sessions. The study group will look at student work and data from the NYSESLAT score reports 2017-18. In addition, the teachers will study and analyze ELL data from the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) led by one of the ENL teachers. Using the specific data from the EDAT tool, teachers in this program created targeted groups based on ELL/MLL students' strengths and needs across the four modalities of the NYSESLAT. Teachers will also be given the chance monitor the ELL/MLL students who have at risk indicators and understand why these students may be at risk. Our Title III teachers will also participate in ongoing off site professional development focusing on scaffolds for ELLs, small group instruction, and building academic vocabulary provided by Queens North PLO and the work of Marianne Cucchiara. All teachers have participated in Teachers College Reading and Writing Project onsite professional development and two or more full day workshops at Teachers College focused on instruction for ELLs. Professional books being studied include "Balancing Reading and Language Learning" by Mary Cappellini. Our professional learning plan is focused on supporting oral language development and academic vocabulary resulting in high levels of performance for our ENL students. Teachers are also receiving professional development in literacy from an educational consultant monthly and our ULIT, Jill Brogan, who meets with teachers on a weekly basis. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Monthly "Parents as Learning Partners Fridays" invites all parents into classrooms to participate in lessons across the curriculum once every month (ten sessions total) for one forty-five minute period in the classroom followed by a forty-five minute parent workshop presented by multiple licensed classroom teachers in the school, who are on different cross grade curriculum teams. During these parent workshops, parents are divided into grade specific groups in order to provide valuable and meaningful support and taught targeted strategies based on their child's current grade and language level. Each month will focus on socio-emotional learning and development and content area learning. Our first "Parents as Learning Partners Fridays" will be held on 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities October 12, 2018, and will focus on Supporting Students With Anxiety. The upcoming dates for Parents as Learning Partners Fridays will be on December 14, 2018, the focus will be on Using Creative Movement. On January 18, 2019 the focus will be on "Upside Down Mathematics." On February 8, 2019 the focus will be on Conflict Resolution and Anti-Bullying. On April 12, 2019 the focus will be on Accessing Community and Family Resources. On May 14, 2019, we will have our Spring Curriculum Night where parents will have the opportunity to participate in grade specific workshops provided by classroom teachers across the grades to understand the goals and expectations of their child's upcoming grade level. All invitations to these events will be translated by bilingual staff members and oral translation will be provided by bilingual staff members at all workshops and on the day of the Curriculum night in each grade specific group. Our cross grade curriculum team teachers (which include our ENL teachers) plan and present parent workshops, which include strategies to support English Language Learners in different content areas. Oral translation is provided by bilingual staff members in all three major languages (Korean, Chinese, and Spanish) represented in our school at all the monthly parent workshops and other parent engagement events. All Powerpoint presentations presented at all monthly parent workshops are translated by bilingual staff members in the parents' preferred languages and copies are given out to parents on the day of the workshop. Written communication, flyers, invitations to all parent engagement activities are sent home in the parents' preferred languages which are translated by bilingual staff members. Classroom teachers and our Parent Coordinator will maintain attendance records for parents who participate in the classroom visitations. Copies of those lists are given to the Parent Coordinator, who also maintains records of attendance during the parent workshops that follow the classroom visitations. The Parent Coordinator also keeps copies of the tear offs from the initial translated invitation. The supervising school administrator will maintain copies of all agendas and handouts given out during the workshop. All monthly parent workshop presentations and translated invitation letters are all uploaded to the school Google drive. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name The Leonard P. Stavisky Early Childhood Borough Queens School Number 242 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jill Pritchard Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joanna Panagiotopoulos Teacher/Subject Area Woo Kwon / ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Denise Foster / ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Danielle Dimango Assistant Principal April Zappala/Assistant Princi Coach N/A School Counselor Jill Dyzel Parent Annie Lai PTA President Parent Coordinator Marguerite Choudhry Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 385 Total number of ELLs 130 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.77% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Chinese School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 1 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that are utilized to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs are primarily the TCRWP and Fountas and Pinnell assessments. These assessments are administered periodically throughout the year. The data collected in September is used as a baseline assessment. This is what initially informs instruction. The students are assessed on concepts of print (K), letter ID (K), reading level (late K and 1st-3rd grade), sight word recognition (1st-3rd grade), spelling stage (K-3rd grade), and narrative writing (K-3rd grade). Based on the results of these assessments, differentiated instruction can be established. By identifying students' areas of need, they can be placed into appropriate groups for explicit strategy instruction. The bilingual teacher will use teacher created formative and summative assessments in Chinese to monitor student progress in Chinese literacy and language development. Assessments include: rubrics, checklists, anectodal notes and task based projects. 2018-19 CEP 52  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers utilize the data from the baseline assessments and running records to drive instruction. ENL students are placed in strategy groups and differentiated instruction is used to foster their learning through the use of visuals, small group lessons, co teaching methods and parallel teaching methods. ENL teachers push in to the classroom and provide support to ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school evaluates the success of our programs for ELLs by compiling multiple forms of data, noting patterns and trends. Rigorous efforts to monitor adequate progress of all our ELLs throughout the grades are underway. Formative and summative assessments are utilized. This school-wide endeavor begins with TC Assessments in September in Kindergarten. We are particularly focusing on developing oral language in all our ELLs, but most particularly with our newly arrived students from China. These students have the added benefit of receiving native language support from our Chinese speaking staff members (1 Bilingual Chinese speaking teacher and 4 paraprofessionals). Students from other countries who are new to our school are also encouraged to develop their expressive language abilities. The bilingual teacher will use various assessment methods to monitor student progress using data from running records, student observations, rubrics, checklists and oral assessments in both English and Chinese. Instruction for content area subjects including, science, social studies and ELA will be in English with native language support. We are currently working in conjunction with the superintendent and Field Support Center to determine appropriate assessments to be utilized in the TBE classroom. The ENL teachers along with the Bilingual teacher develop and follow programs that meet the needs of our students, such as reading comprehension, fluency, listening strategies, note taking, speaking and social skills, as well as provide detailed differentiated instruction for all students to be able to complete work and be challenged. The ENL teachers and bilingual teacher collaborate with classroom teachers and meet with network support specialists in an effort to ensure that each student is receiving the highest level of education in order to meet or exceed the Common Core Standards. There seems to be an overall school trend that each year students have been entering our school with a lower level of English proficiency. This year it was noticed that many of our incoming Kindergarten students scored at the Transitioning or Expanding level and did significantly better in the Listening portion of the NYSITELL. Each year there is an increase of students who continue to receive services in grade one, but the number of ELLs decrease in grades 2 and 3. Grade 3 is the only testing grade in our school. As the ELL population has decreased the past two years in grade 3, we usually have less than 20 current ELLs in that grade. These numbers do not include the former ELLs. Our ENL program has been recognized by the Office of English Language Learners and the Council of Greater NY as a school with exemplary ENL practices. P.S. 242 is dedicated to providing every ELL with a standards-based, multi-cultural, academically rigorous program that is aligned to the core curriculum. All ELL community stakeholders- administrators, teachers, and parents as well as members of our extended school community will be called upon to implement the above-mentioned goals. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers along side classroom teachers review the data from the EDAT. The ENL teachers will analyze the data using the EDAT and look for trends. A plan will be formulated and a plan of action or professional development will be provided for teachers and students. Professional development will be ongoing throughout the school year for ENL teachers, the Bilingual teacher and classroom teachers. ENL teachers will work collaboratively with the classroom teachers to develop differentiated instruction to meet the needs of our ELLs. Work on vocabulary development, oral language skills, listening comprehension skills will be an area of intervention and focus. We also offer Title III ELL after school support to all current ELLs in grades K-3 as an extra support to support language development. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1 Explicit instruction at the first tier is for all students and consists of instruction in: phonological awareness, the alphabetic principle (letter-sound correspondence), fluency with connected texts, vocabulary development and comprehension. ENL teachers provide explicit instruction in word identification, phonological awareness, and vocabulary instruction. ENL teachers provide structured opportunities to practice English and teachers work together to provide supportive learning environments 2018-19 CEP 53  in which students are highly engaged. The ENL teachers push in to the classrooms and provide small group instruction when needed. It is essential that we provide students with rigorous academic content (Common Core) and that we provide our ELLs with multiple opportunities to build on their language development through turn and talk, read aloud with accountable talk and multiple opportunities to work in groups throughout the school day. We also integrate reading and writing into each content area to boost academic talk and language. Our goal is to help build our ELLs' abilities to form and express ideas through dialogue, questioning and sharing ideas and knowledge. Tier 2 The second tier is only for those students who do not reach expected benchmarks using various progress-monitoring assessments. We use several assessment tools. The performance tasks are used in math and ELA in grades K-3. Teachers utilize running records as a means for identifying students that are not meeting their reading benchmarks. Writing on Demand pieces are also used to drive instruction as well as to identify students who may be struggling in writing workshop. If an ELL student is flagged as at risk or below benchmark on any particular skill of competency, the student will receive targeted instructional support to bolster development in the competency area. In Tier 2, students receive additional intensive support in small groups or individually. This support is provided within general education. Students may receive this additional support in their classrooms or in a different setting. ELLs in Kindergarten may receive at risk services from the AIS service provider. ELLs in grade 1 may receive Reading Recovery services, AIS services as well as LLI services. ELLs in grades 2 and 3 receive AIS services once they are flagged and the RTI team has met and discussed the type of support that is needed to help bolster development. Tier 3 Students who continue to struggle are then provided with a third tier or level of assistance that is more intensive. ELLs that are identified as Tier 3 are mandated to receive services from our special education teachers as well as AIS services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding 2015-2016-40 students (All Ks with 2 first 11 (27.5%) 3 (7.5%) 12 (30%) 15 (35%) graders) 2016-2017-66 students (All Ks with one 2nd grader) 24 (36%) 10 (14%) 11 (15.5%) 21 (30%) 2017-2018- 56 students (All Ks with one 1st grader) 7 (12.5%) 6 (10.7%) 16 (28.5%) 26 (46%) Our data patterns for the 2017-2018 academic school year across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL reveal the following: In the 2017-2018 school year there was a decrease in the number of entitled students. Additionally, there was an increase in the number of students scoring at the Transitioning and Expanding Level and a significant decrease in the number of entering and emerging students from the 2016-2017 school year to the 2017-20178 school year. NYSESLAT Spring 2017 Entering (B) Grade K - 7 Entering (B) Grade 1 - 3 Entering (B) Grade 2 - 0 Entering (B) Grade 3 - 0 Combined total: students scored the Beginner/Entering level Emerging (I) Grade K -5 Emerging (I) Grade 1 - 6 Emerging (I) Grade 2 - 0 2018-19 CEP 54  Emerging (I) Grade 3 - 0 Combined total: students scored the Entering/Low Intermediate level Transitioning(I) Grade K -16 Transitioning (I) Grade 1-7 Transitioning (I)Grade 2-6 Transitioning(I)Grade 3-1 Combined total: students scored the Entering/High Intermediate level Expanding (A) Grade K - 26 Expanding (A) Grade 1 - 35 Expanding (A) Grade 2 -10 Expanding (A) Grade 3 - 6 Combined total: students scored the Expanding/Advanced level Commading (P) Grade K- N/A Commading (P) Grade 1- 13 Commading (P) Grade 2- 11 Commading (P) Grade 3- 3 Combined total: students scored Commanding/Proficient Our data patterns across proficiency levels and grades on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT reveal the following: 37% of the ELL students who took the NYSESLAT in the Spring of 2017 scored commanding on the exam. 36% of the ELL students who took the NYSESLAT in the Spring of 2017 scored at the expanding/advanced level, 18% of the ELL students scored at the transitioning level and 9 % of the ELL students scored at the emerging level. There were 0 ELLs students in grades 2 that scored at the beginner level. Most of the students in grades 1, 2 and 3 scored either expanding or commanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After analyzing the data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and ELA, the ENL teachers used the data to come up with implications for future instruction. Speaking scores have improved, but it is still an area of need. ENL teachers will implement more opportunities for talk. Listening is also an area of need. Students need more practice with listening to content area based stories and answering questions about them. Reading and writing scores have improved. Many of our ELLs did better than the state and scale score average in all modalities. Although a great deal of work is done on response to literature, a greater emphasis on text dependent questions and questioning will be an area of focus. Inquiry groups were also formed to analyze the data using the EDAT tool as well as the other assessments tools used to monitor student progress and to support our ELLs using authentic, meaningful learning opportunities. A focus on giving students ample opportunities for students to develop metacognitive strategies will also enhance language development. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers work collaboratively together to engage students and ENL best practices. Teachers work on scaffolding to reach learners on all levels. ENL teachers may use supplementary material such as, visuals, props, gestures and body language or speech modifications. Teachers provide opportunities have a connection to real life. New information is presented in the context of known information to augment vocabulary development. ENL teachers provide the staff and parents with informative sessions and professional development over the course of the school year during Monday professional development and parent workshops are conducted during the school day to inform parents of ENL methodologies and best practices. Teacher led inquiry teams focus on targeted cycles in ELA and Math in order to address the needs of our students. This information is disseminated to administration, classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers on a monthly basis. We focus on the that students need assistance with according to NYSESLAT data, ELA and Math data and ongoing assessments. When necessary, we adjust our program in order to design appropriate curriculum for each child in ELA , Math, Social Studies and Science. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL program’s organizational model for grades K-1 is push-in, collaborative co-teaching, and parallel teaching. Our ENL program models feature students of heterogeneous (mixed) proficiency levels. Each class with any number of ELLs will receive their mandated minutes of instruction through the push-in model. All students are receiving ENL services in their appropriate grade levels. Students are grouped heterogeneously by need and grade in our push in and pull out ENL instructional program. When possible, the ENL push in is during the literacy block so comprehension is maximized. ELLs are receiving the New York State mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction time based on student proficiency levels based on individual NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing data. Entering and Emerging levels are receiving 360 minutes of ENL (180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, 180 minutes Integrated ENL.) Transitioning level ELLs are receiving 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either Integrated ENL or Stand Alone). Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content areas. Commanding Level (proficient ELLs) are receiving 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week, per Part 154. Planning arrangements between ENL and classroom teachers takes place during common preps and grade meetings. The TBE teacher will be providing the mandated minutes for all ELLs in the TBE class in Kindergarten. b. TBE program. If applicable. This year our school has opened a Transitional Bilingual Class for the 2017-2018 school year in Kindergarten. Based on our Home Language Survey, a substantial number of our ELLs are Chinese speaking. We have hired a full time Bilingual Teacher who is teaching the Transitional Bilingual Kindergarten class in both Chinese and English. The TBE teacher will be providing the mandated minutes for all the ELLs in the TBE class. Our goal is to have students acquire fluency in a second or third language after they acquire fluency in their native or home language. Fluency relates to speaking, reading and writing. At the entering and emerging levels, TBE studetns will receive more support and instruction in the home language. At the transitioning and expanding levels, the TBE teacher will provide Home language support as needed. The TBE teacher will make careful considerations when determining which language is best to teach certain concepts and provide academic language for using and mastering concepts. The TBE teacher will also use factors which include: educations backgrounds and home language literacy skills. This will allow for differentiated instructions that meet the individual student's needs. As the TBE program is newly started this year, we are still in the process of researching best practices and methodologies in conjunction with the Superintendent and Field Support Center to determine appropriate assessments to that will be utilized to monitor progress in content area subjects. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our ENL program, three full-time ENL teachers provide instruction in English as per the NYC Department of Education Language Allocation Policy Guidelines. The ENL component develops English language skills and assists each ELL student in attaining English language proficiency. Our bilingual Chinese speaking teacher provides the mandated minutes for the Kindergarten students in the Transitional Bilingual class. According to the needs and levels of the students in the TBE class, the teacher uses home language support when deemed necessary. ENL teachers collaboratively co-teach in a push-in model or pull-out small groups of students to work on targeted skills. All ELLs receive instruction in English as per the NYC Department of Education Language Allocation Policy Guidelines. As per CR 2018-19 CEP 56  Part 154 Regulations, Entering and Emerging levels are receiving 360 minutes of ENL (180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL, 180 minutes Integrated ENL.) Transitioning level ELLs are receiving 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either Integrated ENL or Stand Alone). Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content areas. Commanding Level (proficient ELLs) are receiving 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week, per Part 154. Planning arrangements between ENL and classroom teachers takes place during common preps and grade meetings. ENL and ELA instruction include literature and content-based instruction which is aligned with The Common Core ELA and Language Standards. All classrooms including our TBE class feature: print rich environments, students’ current work which is aligned with The Common Core Standards, the use of word walls, leveled classroom libraries, well equipped centers with instructional resources that support English language literacy development, instructional technology, and etc. Our school utilizes the balanced literacy model aligned with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum. Since the school's inception, statistics show that TC is an especially effective approach for maximizing ELL's achievement in both reading and writing. Through reading and writing workshop, students take part in a variety of different learning experiences that support differentiated instruction (one-on-one conferencing, small group guided reading and strategy groups) which addresses individual student needs. During the read aloud component, the following strategies are used in the Free Standing ENL pogram and the TBE class: reading slowly with appropriate tone and gestures, using visual aids/realia and giving visual directions using gestures. During independent reading, all ELLs read books at their independent level, and work on reading skills appropriate to their level. Role-playing, dramatization, shared reading and writing experiences, and hands-on activities further support the English development of our ELLs. Home language support is given to students in the TBE classroom. In the ENL program model, native language support is provided through the addition of bilingual literature which is now accessible in every classroom library. Students who are literate in their native language are also provided with bilingual dictionaries to assist them during instructional time. In our ENL program, we have several new students who have just arrived from China. Our full time TBE Chinese teacher assists these students. She assesses the students' reading and writing skills in Chinese in order to plan for effective literacy development. By ascertaining that the student is fluent and literate in his/her first language, the teacher helps transfer literacy skills. Native language support provided by this teacher is strategically used to enrich comprehension and enable the Chinese speaking ELLs to succeed academically. The same applies to the Korean speaking ENL teacher in assisting the ELLs who are beginners and speak Korean as a home language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL push in program is taught in English. The bilingual teacher provides home language support when deemed necessary during content area instruction. Our ENL and TBE program model, standards-based content area lessons are taught using the following types of instructional scaffolding techniques: Modeling-giving students a clear example of what is expected of them. Bridging-activating students’ prior knowledge. Contextualization- bringing complex ideas closer to students’ personal experiences. Content area instruction is aligned with The Common Core Standards, and utilizes a hands-on approach to learning. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. In Science, the students take part in experimental learning. All instruction is delivered in English with home language support given to students who need it. The bilingual teacher provides the ELLs in the Kindergarten TBE class with native language support as needed. ELLs manipulate many different materials to make abstract concepts more comprehensible. The teacher recycles the tier 3 vocabulary words to make sure the students commit it to memory. The students also have personal journals for each unit of study to record their findings and discoveries. Students have the opportunity to express themselves through words and/or illustrations in English or in their native language. Native language material such as bilingual dictionaries, bilingual online resources, and bilingual books are also available for student use. In Math, students use a variety of manipulatives (pattern blocks, counting bears, geoboards, etc) and math games which serves to enrich their language development. In addition, with the new Investigations program, students take part in richer mathematical conversations 2018-19 CEP 57  which requires them to come up with multiple ways to solve problems, and explain their mathematical thinking. In Social Studies, the use of enlarged illustrations and photographs, big books, songs, vocabulary cards with illustrations, and explicitly tailored reading materials, support and enrich language development.Cooperative learning groups, paired learning, word walls, graphic organizers, Total Physical Response, teaching modeling and trips are all part of instruction. Scaffolding techniques are always used to facilitate and enhance learning while making the content and language instruction comprehensible for English Language Learners. Though ELLs are grouped according to both English proficiency and grade, differentiated groups in both the ENL program and TBE program are formed within each class in order to further meet the need of individual students. ELLs are continually monitored both formally (tests) and informally (observations). The ENL teachers along with the bilingual teacher meet on a continuous basis to analyze the data and determine the proper skills/lessons to be taught. Students are taught in strategy and guided reading groups according to their individual levels of proficiency in each skill area addressed. Furthermore, ELLs are given additional support when necessary in ELA, math and other content areas through the use of intervention programs such as Reading Recovery, AIS, Title III and Title III summer school. All of our ELLs are held to the same standards and expectations as all students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P.S. 242 currently has a free standing ENL Program and a new Transitional Bilingual class in Kindergarten. The language of instruction is English but home language support is provided by the bilingual teacher. ELLs who are administered the NYSITELL and whose home language is Spanish, are administered the Spanish Lab. Bilingual staff are involved with ELLs who need assistance. ELL students who take standardized tests are provided with translated versions of the state exam if deemed necessary. Native language books, dictionaries and glossaries are available for all ELLs. In addition, software is used to differentiate instruction and facilitate language acquisition. Our ENL teachers and bilingual teacher meet with the other classroom teachers and together they continually discuss and plan instruction for our ELLs in order to ensure cohesion across the school day and in every content area. Writing samples in the native language are used to determine native language and content knowledge. Native language is incorporated into English instruction as a support to clarify, build prior knowledge, extend comprehension and bridge experiences. This is done through technology, bilingual staff, peers, native language materials and flexible groups. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Although we do not have any SIFE students, P.S. 242’s plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) includes providing these students with extended instructional time, which is offered through our after school classes and/or one-to-one tutoring. Additionally, SIFEs who exhibit inadequate growth on academic assessments will receive small group instruction designed to help them achieve grade level proficiency. P.S. 242’s plan for newcomers is to provide them with a positive classroom environment. The warm and welcoming atmosphere we create allows for more rapid language development and interaction into our academic setting. We help newcomers adjust to the new school experience more easily by: familiarizing them with lunchtime, arrival/dismissal routines; labeling classroom objects, thereby teaching basic vocabulary; assigning ELLs classroom jobs (taking into account their level of proficiency); focusing on the positive, by creating frequent opportunities for success in the classroom; using gestures as often as possible and making sure the students know what the gestures mean. In addition, we facilitate the acquisition of the rhythm and sounds of English, by having the newcomers listen to and repeat songs and chants. Academic intervention service providers instruct ELLs that are identified as not meeting grade level standards. These ELLs are 2018-19 CEP 58  provided with a variety of intervention services such as: Reading Recovery, resource room, and tutorial time. It is our goal to include newcomers in all instructional activities that take place in the classroom. ELLs in grade three are provided with an after school program focusing on ELA test taking strategies. This familiarizes the students with the format of the ELA and teaches them how to respond to different types of questions (multiple choice and short answer). These students are provided with ELL testing accommodations such as the use of bilingual dictionaries, testing in a separate location, and extended time to complete the test. Our plan for differentiating instruction for ELLs receiving services is to provide more opportunities for written and oral responses to literature and in the content areas. This subgroup will continue to be provided with Academic Intervention Services and have their instruction differentiated based on ongoing assessments. These students are invited to attend the Title III after school program, and those students in grade three are eligible to participate in the ELA Test Prep after school program. Lessons in content areas are designed to meet standards while we differentiate instruction to meet student needs. Strategies we implement when addressing language needs of teaching content to our ELLs are: teaching Tier II and III vocabulary, visuals, building background knowledge, promoting language development through cooperative learning groups, and using native language support. Our newcomers are continually assessed and closely monitored throughout the school year. Based on the students' needs and abilities, they are given ENL support towards English proficiency as well as meeting the curriculum needs of their grade. All newcomers receive their mandated 360 minutes of ENL instruction or are placed in the TBE class as indicated on their program selection form in which they also receive 360 minutes each week in order to support their efforts towards success. Our plan for continuing transitional support (2 years) for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, calls for supporting language learning through the administration of authentic assessments based on multiple measures. Multiple measures include running records, writing rubrics and student work samples. When embedded in instruction, these measures will provide the classroom teachers with the appropriate information to plan purposeful instruction for these students. Classroom teachers will be encouraged to continue the use of scaffolding to support specific language needs (linguistic cues). In addition, teachers will be advised to monitor the language output of these students and promote independence through cooperative learning activities. Providing opportunities for these transitional students is crucial for advanced fluency. Former ELLs will be provided with 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content areas. In addition, they are given testing accommodations (time extension, seperate location, translated glossaries). A plan is not needed for Long-Term ELLs since our school is a K-3 school and does not have long term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELL-SWD's, IEPs are consulted to ensure that adequate modifications and services are being received. Modifications and adaptations are made to maximize students’ potential for success. Some textbook and curriculum adaptations include: providing alternative books with similar concepts on a less demanding reading level, providing high interest reading material, giving directions in small steps, checking progress and providing frequent feedback, supplying extra motivation during the first few minutes of every assignment, etc. All ELLs identified as having special needs will be instructed with ENL methodologies. In addition, the students' multiple modalities are taken into account when planning for instruction. ELLs with special needs receive Academic Intervention Services by an AIS teacher in areas of identified need. Such students are also eligible to attend our Title III after school program. Strategies we also use include: tapping into prior knowledge, meaningful and standards based language use across curriculum in student's instructional level, collaborative learning, teaching Tier II and Tier III vocabulary, scaffolding and differentiation. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 59  Our school uses curricula, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. All ELL-SWDs learn from the same curriculum as their general education classmates. However, when appropriate, the curricula is modified for individual students to allow them to understand the concepts being taught. Additionally, instructional practices are modified. Based on observed needs, ELL-SWDs work in small groups, with a partner, or one on one with the teacher to ensure success. Supplemental materials and manipulatives or real-life objects, may be given to these students for further scaffolding and support. Finally, the ENL teachers are flexible with their schedules to ensure that the ELL-SWDs are serviced during times of the day where students have shown a higher rate of concentration. We are cognizant of students' strengths and challenges when planning Common Core instruction and focus on IEP goals and needs. Collaborating with classroom teachers and related service providers allows the ENL teachers to gain knowledge of students' routines and wide range of academic and language abilities and needs. The ENL teachers also utilize Tutorial time each day to work closely with students who need more support or practice in specific areas and skills. This allows for both remedial and enrichment activities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our students receive differentiated instruction in ELA, Math and other content areas. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas are available for all of the above-mentioned ELL subgroups. Our Literacy, Math and other content area curriculum teams complete developmental checklists and materials that are created for all ELLs in order to provide targeted intervention in all of our ELL subgroups. In Science and Social Studies, ESL and classroom teachers build academic vocabulary for ELLs through rich non-fiction texts, and the use of technology. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers, as well as other service providers, set clear goals and assess ELLs on an ongoing basis at all levels using multiple, fair and equitable measures. Assessment is conducted in English or in the native language as appropriate. This information is used to: determine students academic progress, assess their level of English proficiency, and refine services to ELLs when reporting intervention outcomes. To further support the ELL students in grade three, the school provides them with an after school program focusing on ELA and Math test taking strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs or improvements for the upcoming school year include: The addition of a Transitional Bilingual program to our school, as some parents have expressed interest in this program based on our Parent Selection form and Home Language Survey We will continue to supplement our ENL program with materials by Mondo and National Geographic, which focuses on expressive oral language; an area of great need for our youngest ELLs. We have purchased additional bilingual dictionaries and books in various languages to provide the students with more extensive Native Language support. We will continue to order Native Language and bilingual fiction and non-fiction literature for our classrooms and school library. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This year we implemented a Transitional Bilingual Chinese speaking class in Kindergarten for the 2017-2018 school year. There are no plans to discontinue any programs or services to ELLs at this time. On the contrary, we are always looking for new ways to expand and to acquire additional programs/services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including Arts residencies provided by Young Audiences. All grade three classes are participating in Tae Kwon Do instructional classes. In addition, all ELLs are able to receive individualized or small group instructional during tutorial and extended day. Title III after school program and grade three test prep after school programs are offered to all ELL students. Other services available to ELLs (if necessary) are Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Counseling, Applied Physical Education, hearing services, as well as the supplemental academic services such as AIS, Reading Recovery, Resource Room, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each classroom has a very large, multicultural and diversified library of fiction and non-fiction books along with the most current books supported by the Teachers College Reading and Writing project. We currently use the Words Their Way centers-2018-19 CEP 60  based, word study program, the FOSS Science program and the Houghton Mifflin Social Studies program. This year in Math, all classrooms are using the Investigations Math Program. Other supplemental ENL materials include Rigby’s On Our Way to English program which focuses on all aspects of the balanced literacy approach, as well as the Mondo, Let's Talk About It Program which focuses on developing oral language skills. We also have new sets of National Geographic books to help with our Content Area instruction. In addition, every classroom in our school is equipped with a Smartboard and some classrooms have Smartboard accessories (slates, tables, clickers, etc) that promote interactive learning. In addition, teachers across all grades utilize overhead projectors and document viewers. New this year, our grade three students are learning through the use of the IPAD. Finally, each classroom is equipped with multiple desk top computers and laptops which make the following computer programs accessible to our ELLs: - Kidspiration – (Gr. K-3) Created for K-5 learners, Kidspiration,® develops thinking, literacy and numeral skills using proven visual learning principles. In reading and writing, Kidspiration strengthens word recognition, vocabulary, comprehension and written expression. - Kid Pix – (Gr. K-1) - is a bitmap drawing program aimed at children. - 3d Froggy Phonics – (Gr.K) - 3D Froggy Phonics helps students learn the phonics skills they need to develop their early reading skills. - Millie’s Math House – (Gr. K-1) - students build a foundation of fundamental math concepts and thinking skills. -Pixie Art Program – (Gr.K-3) - Pixie is educational software for elementary students combining a paint program with standards-based curriculum activities to build 21st century skills. -Sammy’s Science House (Gr. K-1) - introduces and builds essential early science and thinking skills while engaging young students with five fun-filled activities -Bailey’s Book House (Gr. K-1) - now through nine playful activities, students learn about letter names and sounds, rhyming words, adjectives, how text relates to visual symbols, positional words, letter recognition, sentence building and much more. These activities help build language concepts and thinking skills students need to communicate and make sense of the world around them. -Thinkin’Things “Toony the Loon’s Lagoon” – (Gr. K-1) - build listening skills and auditory memory as you create tunes with Toony Loon on the wacky xylophones. Can you repeat the pattern Toony plays? -Reader Rabbit – Learn to Read with Phonics (Gr. K-1) Preschool & Kindergarten. Two great Reader Rabbit programs teach preschoolers and kindergartners reading with phonics. -Sticky bear – Kindergarten Activities – (Gr. K) - this dynamic program encourages children to discover the alphabet, numbers, shapes, and colors plus a wide range of preschool skills. -Investigations – (Gr. K-3) - many of the Investigations Mathematics games come with variations that allow players to progress from easy to more challenging versions. Money, Multiplication, matching games, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Throughout each program model, ELLs are given the opportunity to express themselves in their native language when needed through their writing.When incoming ELLs arrive from other countries, we try to team them up with students who speak their language or place them in a transitional bilingual class or in a classroom where there is a bilingual speaking paraprofessional. Our Chinese speaking bilingual teacher along with bilingual paraprofessionals all help assess the students' reading and writing skills in Chinese in order to plan for effective literacy development. By ascertaining that the student is fluent and literate in his/her first language, the ENL teacher helps transfer literacy skills.We also have bilingual dictionaries and bilingual libraries available for use. At P.S. 242 we have respect for and celebrate the linguistic and cultural diversity of students. There is always collaboration between school, home and community. Native language is incorporated into English instruction as a support to clarify, build prior knowledge, extend comprehension and bridge experiences. This is all done through technology, bilingual staff, peers, native language materials and flexible groups. The Korean ENL teacher provides the same type of support for our Korean speaking ELL students. Native language supports are strategically used to enrich comprehension and enable ELLs to succeed academically. In addition, each classroom library has a collection of bilingual literature in various languages. Bilingual dictionaries are also accessible to our ELLs who are literate in their first language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 61  The required services support our ELLs and the resources correspond to their ages and grade levels. They are given bilingual texts, glossaries and translation services when necessary. In addition, instruction is differentiated in order to meet each child's individual needs as they strive towards both English proficiency as well as meeting their grade's curriculum requirements. We place our ELLs in small groups based upon grade level and proficiency levels. We ensure that all required services are given by appropriate teachers and we enter this information in STARS. Based on IEP goals and recommendations, we plan instruction for our ELLs with disabilities. Additionally, we utilize our most updated NYSESLAT/NYSITELL score data and we plan each ELLs appropriate minutes of service according to the CR-Part 154. Kindergarten students receive instruction in the development of expressive language, vocabulary, and phonics. They utilize center activities, songs, poems, chants and rhymes, in addition to shared reading/writing and interactive reading/writing. The Fountas and Pinnell program supports the Kindergarten ELLs who are identified with a need for improvement. Our first grade ELLs who require support services receive Reading Recovery. Both programs enable our ELLs to attend to, learn about, and effectively use information about letters, sounds, and words. AIS service providers push-in to classes to work with our second and third grade ELLs. Similar to our ENL teachers, all service providers collaborate with the classroom teacher to provide differentiated instruction for our ELLs. Classroom teachers are also provided with staff development in ENL best practices and strategies. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building or have a co location. Instructional materials are shared with our entire school building. Each classroom has a very large, multicultural and diversified library of fiction and non-fiction books along with the most current books supported by the Teachers College Reading and Writing project. We currently use the Words Their Way centers-based, word study program, the FOSS Science program and the Houghton Mifflin Social Studies program. This year in Math, all classrooms are using the Investigations Math Program. Other supplemental ENL materials include Rigby’s On Our Way to English program which focuses on all aspects of the balanced literacy approach, as well as the Mondo, Let's Talk About It Program which focuses on developing oral language skills. In addition, every classroom in our school is equipped with a Smartboard and some classrooms have Smartboard accessories (slates, tables, clickers, etc) that promote interactive learning. In addition, teachers across all grades utilize overhead projectors and document viewers. New this year, our grade three students are learning through the use of the IPAD. Finally, each classroom is equipped with multiple desk top computers and laptops which make the following computer programs accessible to our ELLs: - Kidspiration – (Gr. K-3) Created for K-5 learners, Kidspiration,® develops thinking, literacy and numeracy skills using proven visual learning principles. In reading and writing, Kidspiration strengthens word recognition, vocabulary, comprehension and written expression. - Kid Pix – (Gr. K-1) - is a bitmap drawing program aimed at children. - 3d Froggy Phonics – (Gr.K) - 3D Froggy Phonics helps students learn the phonics skills they need to develop their early reading skills. - Millie’s Math House – (Gr. K-1) - students build a foundation of fundamental math concepts and thinking skills. -Pixie Art Program – (Gr.K-3) - Pixie is educational software for elementary students combining a paint program with standards-based curriculum activities to build 21st century skills. -Sammy’s Science House (Gr. K-1) - introduces and builds essential early science and thinking skills while engaging young students with five fun-filled activities -Bailey’s Book House (Gr. K-1) - now through nine playful activities, students learn about letter names and sounds, rhyming words, adjectives, how text relates to visual symbols, positional words, letter recognition, sentence building and much more. These activities help build language concepts and thinking skills students need to communicate and make sense of the world around them. -Thinkin’Things “Toony the Loon’s Lagoon” – (Gr. K-1) - build listening skills and auditory memory as you create tunes with Toony Loon on the wacky xylophones. Can you repeat the pattern Toony plays? -Reader Rabbit – Learn to Read with Phonics (Gr. K-1) Preschool & Kindergarten. Two great Reader Rabbit programs teach preschoolers and kindergartners reading with phonics. -Sticky bear – Kindergarten Activities – (Gr. K) - this dynamic program encourages children to discover the alphabet, numbers, shapes, and colors plus a wide range of preschool skills. 2018-19 CEP 62  -Investigations Math Games – (Gr. K-3) - many of the Investigations Mathematics games come with variations that allow players to progress from easy to more challenging versions. Money, Multiplication, matching games, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 242 provides a wide variety of activities to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. At Pre-K registration for incoming Ks, ENL teachers and key school personnel facilitate a smooth registration process. Translators are available to assist. Students are interviewed with their parents. ENL teachers make sure that the home language survey is completed accurately. In June, an Orientation is scheduled where parents of newly enrolled students are formally introduced to all key school personnel. Our newest students have the opportunity to visit Kindergarten classes. Thus, before school begins parents and students have had a warm and informative introduction to our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As we are an early childhood school that is K-3, this question does not apply. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff development takes place during grade level conferences and faculty conferences. Throughout the school year, the ENL teachers attend professional development through DELLSS, the Borough and Field Support Center and Teacher's College. They turnkey the information to our classroom, cluster and special education teachers and all paraprofessionals who work with ELLs, sharing pertinent information on working with ELLs in all content areas and ensuring continuity across the ENL program and the classroom. ENL teachers also attend training in Common Core and ENL methodologies as well as continuously being updated regarding NYSESLAT and NYSITELL training and policies. The ENL teachers work closely with the school secretary and parent coordinator to review all important information and documents. ENL teachers will be attending professional development both in house and out of site through Teacher's College They will also be attending professional development on how to use Technology in the classroom with ELLs, RTI for ELLs, EDAT tools and scaffolding and differentiation. The ENL teachers attend DELLSS workshops and other professional development opportunities offered by the Borough Field Support Center and Teacher's College addressing academic rigor and the Common Core Learning Standards and this information is presented to classroom and cluster teachers as well as paraprofessionals and other service providers. Many of our ENL teachers have also attended Fordham University for ENL professional development. There are various workshops and Professional Development opportunities informing teachers how to facilitate student learning in hopes of meeting or exceeding Common Core Learning Standards when working with ELLs and Former ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 63  ENL teachers conduct professional development activities for the school pedagogical and non pedagogical staff. An ENL workshop is planned during the months of September, November, January, March and May for all staff to attend. All ENL teachers attend 50% of the required professional development hours both in school and at out of building ENL meetings. Both the congruence meetings and the ENL workshop fulfill the 15% of total hours of ELL training for our staff members. Lesson support and modeling is provided by ENL teachers on a as needed basis. When the ENL teacher pushes in, ENL techniques and strategies to support the Common Core Learning Standards are modeled for the classroom teachers. Teachers keep a record of their attendance and pertinent information received during the workshop. Administration keeps copies of all ELL training attendance sheets and all professional development hours. 15% of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including focus on best practices for teaching strategies for ELLs. Our newly hired transitional bilingual teacher will attend workshops intended for sharing best practices and resources for bilingual Chinese programs. The bilingual teacher will engage in research and material studies to craft instructional modules for our TBE Chinese program. Our school has an extensive professional development plan for all ELL personnel. This includes participation in Teachers College calendar days that are focused on engaging ELL students in Common Core Learning Standards, as well as in-house Teacher's College professional development cycles. Many of the workshops offered by DELLS and the Field Support Center are attended by administration, Special Education teachers and ENL personnel. Any workshops for ELLs given by our borough specialist are also attended by classroom teachers whose classes have a high number of ELL students. In addition, content area teachers have attended professional development at the Field Support Center and attend ENL/Curriculum planning meetings. The ENL liason attends monthly meetings to learn about updated regulations in relation to ELL students. Some of the workshops that have been attended are phonics instruction, word study fundamentals, vocabulary development, aligning instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards, incorporating technology into daily instruction, and math instruction that promotes critical thinking, logic, reasoning and mathematical explanations. Workshops of different topics are attended throughout the year. Currently, all ENL teachers are members of the ELL curriculum team. The team focus is to analyze ELL student data to determine the viability of the ENL program at 242Q. As we are a K-3 Early Childhood school, most of our students have passed the NYSESLAT by Grade 3. Most of our students do articulate into their zone schools and continue to receive ELL services if they are mandated. All teachers have had the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training, as per Jose P. Training has occurred at both the school and regional level by ENL teachers, the Network ENL specialist, and in-house Teacher's College staff developers. Each year teachers attend 5-hour Teacher's College calendar days focusing on language development for ELLs. Some of the calendar day topics for this school year are: Diverse Needs Diverse Learners, At Its Heart: RTI and Good Teaching of Diverse Learners Involves Assessment to Small Group Reading Instruction, Adapting Your Primary Reading Workshop to Provide Maximum Support for Your English Language Learners, Differentiating Test Preparation, and Supporting English Language Learners as They Tackle Higher Level Texts. The ENL as Vocabulary Instruction using Tier 2 words and shades of meaning, juicy sentences and deconstructing texts. The Teacher's College staff developers work with teachers on all aspects of literacy: reading, writing, listening and speaking. The focus of these professional development meetings is language development, specifically oral rehearsal. All records of Field Support Center Meetings and TC calendar day attendees are maintained. The principal has a list of the teachers who attended each of the professional development days, teachers maintain their own records, and certificates are kept on file. Our staff participates in long term professional development on educating our ELLs. 15% of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including focus on best practices for teaching strategies for ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 64  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are offered many parent workshops throughout the year to inform them of upcoming assessments and student progress on NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and any Interim ENL assessments. Parents are offered monthly workshops throughout the year to inform them of upcoming assessments and student progress on NYSITELL, NYESESLAT and other ENL assessments. Workshops also include strategies to help their children in all academic areas, including, Reading, Writing, Math, Science, Social Studies, Vocabulary Development, etc. We also meet individually with parents of ELLs during parent engagement hours during the week. In addition to parent teacher conferences, initial orientation, or other meetings, we meet with parents individual to discuss the goals of the program and their child's progress. At these meetings, we provide parents with qualified interpreters and translators. We use bilingual staff as well as the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We discuss with parents their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all academic areas. We discuss goals of the program, the child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all academic content areas. Attendance for these meetings are recorded on parent engagement logs and checklists. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S. 242, we have high parent involvement. We offer numerous opportunities for parent involvement in our school throughout the year for parents to participate in activities with their children both during the school day and during after school events. We have parent workshops, NYSESLAT Parent Orientation, school trips, an International Night event, shows, and other activities. We have staff members who speak second languages and are available to translate when necessary. Parents of ELLs are active participants in all of the P.S. 242 extra curricular parent activities. Parents and ENL students were also encouraged to attend Saturday Title III family workshops within the district. These workshops provided English language support and fostered and promoted family engagement for students and parents. We had many families attend these family workshops. Two of our ENL teachers are bilingual and can translate for parents who share their home language. Other bilingual staff members are used when necessary. We also use the DOE over the phone translation services are used extensively to facilitate communication between parents and teachers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our vision is to ensure that our ELLs are explicitly included in the school agenda, vision and goals. Planning always includes all of our ELLs. Educators communicate regularly with parents in a language they can understand. Our staff is knowledgable about the specific needs of their ELLs. Our ELLs have full access to all levels of instruction, enrichment and extracurricular activities. Student work displays, school activities and hallway conversations value diversity of language and culture. Language and literacy instruction is infused across the curriculum and our staff includes native language speaks. Cooperative learning strategies are infused daily. Scaffolding techniques are used as well ways to engage our students through interactive lessons. 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patricia Costa, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Leonard P. Stavisky Early School DBN: 25Q242 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jill Pritchard Title Principal April Zappala Assistant Principal Marguerite Choudhry Parent Coordinator Joanna Panagiotopoulos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Annie Lai Woo Kwon Parent Teacher/Subject Area Denise Foster Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Jill Dyzel School Counselor Danielle Dimango N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 10/2/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q242 School Name: Leonard P. Stavisky EC School Superintendent: D. Dimango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Joanna Panagiotopoulos ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), generate RHLA and RPOB ATS reports, look at student emergency cards, and review Language Information Surveys to determine parent language preference. We receive referrals from both teachers and the Parent Coordinator. Our Parent Coordinator also surveys parents before and after school and informs them about our written/oral translation services. Our findings are that the major languages in our school that the parents request translation for are Chinese, Korean and Spanish. In addition, the low incidence languages are Urdu, Arabic and Farsi. Teachers were informed of these findings during common planning periods and informal conversations. These services are for all parents, not just for parents of ELLs. We analyze data from ATS reports RHLA and RPOB and share with the school community including parents and teachers. We provide parents with translations when filling out student emergency contact cards and give them access to translators and translated versions. We use information on the emergency contact cards to determine preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Mandarin Korean Spanish English Arabic Farsi 214 26 17 151 1 2 51% 6% 4% 36% 1% 1% 214 26 17 15 1 2 51% 6% 4% 37% 1% 1% 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-19 CEP 70  2018-19 CEP 71  % 2018-19 CEP 72  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Afterschool flyers, permission slips, contact information September 2017 Welcome Parent Orientation Letters September 2017 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The translated document we disseminate are: newsletters, calendars, report cards (available online), after school program information, Title III program information, notices for parent workshops, open school invitations and special events. These documents include but are not limited to: -Title III After school flyers, permission slips, contact information -Welcome Parent Orientation Letters -NYSITELL related documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement Letters). -NYSESLAT Parent Workshop invitations -Parent Meeting Letters -Parents as Learning Partners LetterS We use in house school staff and DOE translation and Interpretation Unit or outside vendor language services to help with translation and interpretation. If necessary, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 73 These translated documents are distributed at the same time as the school population. In addition, NYSESLAT translated information is distributed three weeks before admninistration of the NYSESLAT. Parents are informed that the DOE has Translated student report cards also available. Most parents request English and Mandarin as their preferred language for both written and oral communication. Some parents request Korean, Spanish and Arabic. NYSITELL Related Documents (Entitlement/Non Entitlement Letters, Etc.) September 2017 NYSESLAT parent workshop invitations January/February 2018 Family Fun Night Flyers Ongoing November 2018 Title III letters 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent/Teacher Evening September 2017, November 2017, March 2018 and May 2018 provide interpretation service(s)? All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented in each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. 2018-19 CEP 74  Parents as Learning Partners/Parent Workshops Ongoing Curriculum nights with translators available May 2018 NYSESLAT Workshop January/February 2018 Individual Parent ELL conferences Ongoing/Weekly throughout the 2017-2018 school year. We send documents to the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to request translated versions in a timely manner. All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented in each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. All phone conversations for attendance, guidance, teacher concerns and nurse are in preferred language, if necessary. This will enable our parents to achieve a greater comfort level and a better understanding of the material being presented in each meeting or on each informational notice. Individual ELL conferences are held multiple times throughout the year with translators available. We contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. Whenever necessary, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We utilize bilingual staff to assist with translations for parents in their native languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 75  The parent coordinator sends out email blasts immediately in the event of a school emergency. We make phone calls in parents preferred languages in any emergency through the use of bilingual staff and the Translation/Interpretation Services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to ensure that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education, we have translated language guides and posters in the school lobby from the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to welcome all Limited English speaking parents. Language Access Coordinators in the building were trained by the Field Support Specialist about all materials available to parents and teachers for translation services. These coordinators then turnkey information to the rest of the pedagogical and non pedagogical staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will use bilingual staff and contact DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever the need arises. We will show translated editions of the Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents Guide to Language Access, Language ID Guide to provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require such services. Our goal is to ensure that parents whose language is other than English are provided with the opportunity to participate in their child's education. We inform all parents of the availability and access to language assistance services. Parents will be informed of their rights during PTA meeting, NYSESLAT workshops, individual parent meetings. We ensure this for all parents who require them, not just parents of ELLs. We plan to have school notices regarding parent workshops, PTA meetings, and Parent Teacher Conferences translated. In addition, we have translated report card. We also utilize the DOE translation unit in addition to bilingual in house staff and other outside vendors to translate written notices. We plan to provide oral translations during the regular school day using our bilingual staff members. Signs are clearly posted in the main office for translation services. Whenever possible, provisions are made for parents to have immediate translation on the telephone or during school visits. We post signs regarding visitor access in translated languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms we use to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services are parent surveys. Also, we utilize feedback from PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences, phone conversations, parent workshops, 2018-19 CEP 76  and assembly programs. Lastly, we all parents fill out school surveys in their home languages in the beginning of every school year. 2018-19 CEP 77 
