2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 27Q253 P.S. 253 Principal: PHOEBE ROBINSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S.253Q 342700010253 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 27Q253 1307 Central Avenue Far Rockaway, NY 11691 (718)327-0895 (718)327-3964 Phone Number: Phyllis James Fax: Email Address: pjames@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Phoebe Grant-Robinson Diana Vosswinkel WaldinePerez Jennifer Sullivan Renee Moore N/A N/A N/A District Information Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 642 5770 Phone Number: 718 642 5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Ozone Park New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5839 Phone Number: 718-327-3964 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Phoebe Robinson Diana Vosswinkel Mr. Waldine Perez Renee Moore N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Mrs. Giselle Ruiz Wilson Mrs. Jennifer Sullivan Ms. Cindy Ramirez Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mrs. Maria Sunyak Ms. Nancy Vera Mrs. Leona Perry N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At P.S.253Q, our mission is to cultivate academic pride and civic responsibility, as our students are infused with the love of learning through exploration and explicit instruction that integrates Mathematics, the Arts, Science and Technology. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Home to a diverse population of 579 students in Pre-K- Grade 5, P.S. 253Q is located in Far Rockaway, Queens. Our school is comprised of : 62.28% Hispanic, 31.67% Black, 1.25% White, 3.02% Asian, 0.36% Pacific Islander, 0.71%American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 0.71% Multi-Racial. 48.4% Males and 51.60% Females. Within our population, 24.91% are Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and 30.78% are English Language Learners (ELL’s). Recently recognized as a New York City Respect For All School, this year, we will continue our journey as a Leader In Me school as we work to ensure that all of our students see that they always have the choice to do what's right. We celebrate students’ accomplishments at our award ceremonies through Positive Behavior Incentive Strategies and student of the month recognition. In addition, we recognize and encourage upper grade students who exemplify remarkable leadership qualities, to be active members of the Grade 5 student council. Through our partnership with Sean Covey's, "The Leader in Me" we are able to designing and establish an educational environment in which students work together to promote positive behavior throughout the building. "The Leader in Me' focuses on five core competencies: self-management, self-awareness, responsible decision making, relationship skills and social awareness to build student accountability and a culture of respect in our building. Our students learn these core competencies through 7 habits that are introduced school wide and woven throughout the fabric of our instructional design, throughout the year. P.S. 253Q, a 4th year charter member of the National Elementary Junior Honor Society, emphasizes high expectations and celebrate students' accomplishments. With high expectations, we continue to acknowledge distinguished academic achievement at our annual induction of students into the Elementary Junior Honor Society. As Celebrated in our 2017-2018 PPO, Indicator 4.2-Collaborative Practices and Shared Leadership, is highlighted as an Area of Celebration. The feedback states, "Establishing structures that promote distributive leadership and professional collaborations will support the growth of teacher practice and student outcomes. During the visit, we observed your Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP) team as they engaged in a reflection of their team work. The team meeting was teacher facilitated as they utilized a “Small-Group Reflection” protocol from Diane Cunningham’s Action Research text. Teachers reflected on the impact of their Collaborative Action Research Project as they cited evidence of growth in teacher and student practices. Teachers shared how the action research changed the way they used data to support improved student learning outcomes. " At P.S 253Q, school leaders and staff continue to work in collaboration with students and families to create opportunities that build awareness of the Standards and expectations aligned to our school’s Instructional Focus. Our Student agency is enhanced at P.S. 253Q as students have the opportunity to take an active role in their education by setting goals and self-monitoring their progress towards mastery as measured by rubrics and the Common Core Learning Standards In students’ process of goal setting, teachers supported students in conferences that resulted in a plan of action identifying specific steps needed to reach their goals. Teachers also meet with parents during Open school night and Tuesday afternoons to inform parents of their children’s goals and provide resources and guidance to further support students at home as they work towards accomplishing their goals. In the Spring, all teachers work collaboratively to create grade wide opportunities for parents to participate in our school wide "Progress Report Walk", an information session aimed at cultivating an informed and academically involved body of parents. 2018-19 CEP 10  P.S. 253Q has initiated the use of , monthly newsletters, Remind, Class Dojo, quarterly progress reports, monthly Common Core aligned workshops to celebrate accomplishments, as well as communicate clear and high expectations for students and families. Parents communicate that they look forward to updates on our school’s website, and a weekly robo-call, whereby the Principal’s message is recorded and parents receive a phone call with such twice on the weekend. These means of communication allow all parents to be aware of the events that are occurring in the school. Additionally, our parents are invited to join the Principal for Tuesday’s Tea & Talk, every 3rd Tuesday of the month. Our parents are given an opportunity to discuss and address any concerns regarding their child’s education. Parents are also encouraged to spotlight areas that they are excited about. Community Based Organizations support high quality instruction, engage families in our agenda of moving students towards academic and social–emotional success and simultaneously continue to sustain our implementation of numerous initiatives to strengthen our partnership with families including: Family Fun Nights, Our Annual March for Babies Walk-a-thon and annual Soccer and Skills Initiative. This year, we also held our first Leadership Night, whereby, Student Ambassadors joined teachers in presenting the competencies of the Leader In me. Aligned with the Framework for Great Schools, we have designed all engagements with the core of cultivating an environment in which all stakeholders are committed to a mindset of shared responsibility towards improving student achievement. During School Spirit Week, we initiated our first Cultural Exchange Day, representing the diverse demographics of our community. This event is rooted in rigor and fun. In advance of the celebration, a country was assigned to each class, to encourage students to work collaboratively as they prepared for their presentation to fellow students on their grade. Student created display boards adorned our hallways, in celebration of the diverse culture within our school. All classes engaged in a school-wide gallery walk, viewing displays and artifacts of the countries we come from; students were introduced to traditional clothing, foods, dances, religions and history With a core belief that our students can achieve, the P.S. 253Q school community seeks to actively engage every student at their level, creating a learning pathway significant to the individual learner. Consistent communication of our high expectations is experience throughout our building as the Principal engages with staff, our teachers engage with students and students engage with their tasks. We recognize that when parents and teachers have high expectations for their students, and there is appropriate scaffolding, our students can become more engaged in their class work, improve academic performance, build self-esteem and increase confidence. Furthermore, when students establish high expectations for themselves, they are inclined to self-monitor and self-regulate as they realize the choice is theirs... Collaborative practice among teachers have evolved to engage teachers in Lesson Study cycles, through which, they would collaboratively use data to improve and enhance instructional practices while targeting student needs. At P.S.253Q, school leaders and teachers continue to effectively align curricula to key standards and engage students in rigorous units of study. Additionally, the coherent design and use of rubrics in tandem with consistent checking for understanding and monitoring students' progress across grades and throughout our school, promotes clear and high expectations for all. With our focus on ensuring that students are college and career ready, teachers work collaborative to prepare rigorous classroom learning experiences that engages all students while challenging them to explore, explain their thinking, elaborate or extend their thinking through discussion and reflection and evaluate their understanding and abilities as they progress towards grasping the content or concepts taught. Through student-designed goal setting, 2018-19 CEP 11  our students will begin to understand who they are as learners. A prominent use of rubrics has yielded an increase in self and student-assessment practices as students are being equipped to support the progress of their peers through constructive feedback while monitoring their own progress toward successful outcomes. Areas for continued focus include: Recognizing that literacy is a crucial building block to fostering academic success, we have targeted our instructional core through the Collaborative Action Research Project(CARP). The focus of this project is to develop guiding reading practices with an emphasis on K-1. We have since experienced an increase in collaborative practices and sharing among teachers as they dissect data and analyze teacher practice, to design consistently student-centered and appropriately rigorous learning experiences for ALL students. This year, we will dive deeper into the CARP to enhance academic vocabulary, equipping students with the skills necessary to determine the meaning of tier 1 and tier 2 vocabulary words; deepen comprehension to enable students to make meaning of the complex texts to which they are exposed. Additional emphasis will continue in the following areas: Foster a common understanding of Performance Level appropriate Targets of Measurement(TOM), to strategically design Learning Targets and align formative instructional practices to inform and customize instruction across grades Consistent monitoring for understanding Establishing a shared understanding and shared commitment around the use of assessments to inform feedback and improve student outcomes Enhancing teachers' design of text dependent questions and students' ability to cite evidence explicitly from the text and engage in academic based discourse 2018-19 CEP 12  School-wide implementation of 2 complete Lesson Study cycles on each grade Incorporate hands on and computer science activities that promote critical thinking and analytical skills in daily student engagement Foster Student Agency through the implementation of school-wide Student-Led Conferences Establish a shared understanding and framework grounded in best practices to support the teaching of Writing Further improve processes to regularly evaluate curricular and organizational resources to ensure that appropriate rigor is embedded in all classrooms in order to further students' success, aligned with the Next Generation Standards for all learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. With a rapidly growing population of students whose first language is not English, we are simultaneously experiencing an increase in the amount of students enrolling upper elementary students with interrupted or inconsistent formal education Recent Data from our NYSESLAT indicate a need to focus on Listening and Speaking. Our English Language Learners will continue to benefit from explicit instruction on academic vocabulary to foster appropriate understanding of new terms and usage. A mixture of instruction in context, Total Physical Response Protocol, and visuals will promote the acquisition of new content-specific terms. Thereby leading to an increase in the expression of complete thoughts and ideas relevant to a topic or content area. Attending to our population of students with varying levels of language proficiency and literacy, we will continue to implement systemic practices emphasizing students' development of their fluency and increase exposure and access to complex texts. 2018-19 CEP 13  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In synchrony with our Mission and Instructional Focus, throughout the 2017-2018 school year, PS 253Q has initiated many great events. This includes but is not limited to Family Fun Nights, Character Book Day Parade, our Annual Beginning of the Year Family Event and Rock the Test school-wide pep rally. We hosted our 1st Annual Art Gallery and promoted School Spirit week during the month of May. With our ongoing commitment to enhancing teaching practices and student outcomes, we initiated the Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP) and implemented 2 cycles of Lesson Studies. While every element of the framework is reflected in all of our initiatives and engagement, this year, we've had the most progress in the categories of Rigorous Instruction and Effective School Leadership- respectively, our focus on CARP and Formative Instructional Practices, allowed all teachers to analyze the alignment of their Learning Targets, Success Criteria and actual Student Outcomes to determine. CARP also forged the conditions necessary to build trusting collaborative work among grade level teachers to research best practices, the design and implement an approach to support students in our early childhood grades to successfully advance towards proficiency in Literacy. Reflecting upon Advance, State exams amongst other data points, we have determined that our instructional focus for the upcoming 2018-19 calendar year will remain the same. We have been accepted into CARP year 2 and will be continuing our partnership with Early Reading Matters (ERM) building upon the existing framework from the prior year, as well as rolling out to additional grades to develop the horizontal and vertical alignment throughout the building. This school year invited all staff into the the arena of co-leadership, continuing to build on our prior PPO findings around collaborative practices.. Teachers had many opportunities to lead and support academic and social-emotional initiatives in our building this year. Our instructional Leadership Team(ILT), Leader in Me(LiM) Team, Vertical Team, all invited the expertise, questions and passion of colleagues to support each other on their journey toward enhanced pedagogical practices here at P.S. 253Q. Promoting both effective school leadership and a supportive environment rooted in TRUST, we will be implementing teacher driven clubs into our upper grades, with a culminating project to be presented to various stakeholders. It is our belief that empowering our staff to lead our students in their creative paths will promote deeper academic rigor and further develop their leadership skills needed to succeed in today's society. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q253 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 562 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 37 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 32 25 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 31.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 62.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 58 58 25 91.9% 3.7% 23.0% 31.5% 3.4% 1.4% 4 5% 7.1 35.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Directly related to The Framework for Great Schools element of rigorous instruction, P.S 253Q was identified in our Fall and Spring 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observations an area of celebration in curriculum. Throughout the building the administration and teachers can provide data-based rationale using a variety of formative and summative work products that identify students strengths and weakness.. This allows teachers the ability to inform their lesson planning and instruction to best support student success. In addition, the PPO identified that Standards and expectations are aligned to our school’s Instructional Focus over the past year. Our Students are empowered to take an active role in their education by setting goals and self-monitoring their progress towards mastery as measured by rubrics and the Learning Standards. In students’ process of goal setting, teachers supported students in conferences that resulted in a plan of action identifying specific steps needed to reach their goals. Supporting such student derived goals, during the 2017-2018 school year, all students took part in a student-led conference. Through this design, we are able to empower students to understand and appreciate their academic levels and next steps in conjunction with the teacher to reach their goals. As reflected in the 2016-2017 Math exam results, 36% of our student population met proficiency, indicating a further need for consistent rigorous practices. Along with a continued departmentalized design for our 4th and 5th graders, math teachers on both of these grades will participate in the district-wide Algebra for All initiative. This allows for a deeper focus in the content area. Thereby allowing teachers to grow in expertise, relating to Math. A priority need and target area to be addressed in this Framework Element is enhancement and consistency of teachers' pedagogical practice, whereby, they consistently pre-teach academic language and create an environment in which students feel safe enough to take academic risks, publicly. In support of the identified target area, teachers will receive ongoing support in: utilizing strategic scaffolds and supports; promoting high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 16  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in proficiency on the NYS Math Exam as evidenced through interim benchmark and unit assessments. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All horizontal grade level teams will collaboratively engage in a Mathematics lesson study cycle. Teams will design a standards based lesson after analyzing data to determine a guiding question and theory of action. Teams will ensure access via scaffolds, the utilization of supplemental material to scaffold and challenge all students at their respective entry points. During common planning, Vertical and Horizontal Inquiry Team meetings, teachers will engage in action research around best practices at supporting vocabulary instruction in mathematics, utilizing Anthony Bryk’s work as it aligns to The Framework for Great Schools. All Staff Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff 9/18-6/19 Administrative Team Cycle 1: Sept. - Jan Cycle 2: Feb. - June 9/18-6/19 monthly Administrators Math/Literacy Coaches, ENL Specialists, Grade Leaders District Support S Administration, Teachers Math Instructional Coach Math Teachers 9/18-6/19 Grades 3-5: Tuesday and Thursday Math Journals Professional Learning Opportunities designed to improve the depth of questioning and discussion technique to deepen student achievement in all curriculum content areas especially mathematics. Math stems and question prompts are used in math classes to enhance the implementation of the mathematical practices Implementation of Problem Solving Strategies in Math Classrooms on a selected school day -- Implementation of Number Talks in all Math Classrooms 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator(PC), Math Coach, ELL Specialists, and departmentalized Math teachers, will provide monthly workshops from 9/2018 to 6/2019 for parents, introducing them to the curriculum and providing clear connection regarding the skills being taught and real life connections. Families will also be provide strategies and resources to be used at home. During Parent Engagement (extended time) teachers will engage parents in building awareness and understanding about the rubrics used to assess students’ work products and mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Math Coach will extend parent learning and understanding of the common core standards throughout the school year through Family Math Night and parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize DOE-based and external content area specialists and consultants for teacher training and support, per session for supplemental after school instruction, and additional instructional materials. This will allow us to target individual teachers for subject-specific supports as well as identify students in need of academic interventions. We will use human resources to provide supplemental instruction to identified students. In addition, we will utilize human resources to provide parents with training in the subject area so they can better support their child's academic development. After-school programs will be implemented from October - May, 2x week to support students in both Mathematics. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in proficiency on the NYS Math Exam as evidenced through interim benchmark and unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School designed interim assessments Go-Math Pre- Assessments Go- Math Post-Assessments Mathematical Skills Analysis Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the last several years PPO's, P.S. 253Q has earned High Expectations in Quality Indicator, 3.4, correlated to The Framework for Great Schools element, Supportive Environments. As per a recent PPO, "The principal has clearly defined standards for professional learning and classroom practices embedding elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching to ensure that learning for all stakeholders consistently reflects high expectations. The principal has established high expectations for all staff, which is evidenced throughout the school community through verbal and written structures, which emulates a culture where accountability is reciprocal between all constituents. The school provides ongoing, clear lines of verbal and written communications with families to deepen their understanding of standards based expectations for their children and empower them to help support their children in meeting and exceeding those expectations." Additionally we recently have been recognized as a Respect For All School, where we have established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for staff, students, and families as well as provide supports to achieve those expectations across the academic and social-emotional realms. Furthermore, our NYC School Survey has shown that there is a budding culture of mutual trust, positive attitudes, and accountability, on our journey to create an environment that supports the academic, social and emotional growth of all students and adults. School leaders consistently align professional development, family outreach, student learning experiences, and training to the needs of stakeholders and our school's vision. Current priority reflects a need for in depth analysis and monitoring the social-emotional state of our students and their attendance. Per our 2018 ATS data, our year to date average attendance rate reflects 92%. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to support The Leader in Me initiative. The Leader in Me provides students with fundamental life skills by focusing on five core competencies: self- management, self-awareness, responsible decision-making, relationship skills and social awareness. The students are learning these life skills by using the 7 Habits. The 7 Habits: Be Proactive, Begin with the Ends in Mind, Put First Things First, Think Win Win, Seek First to understand then to be Understood , Synergize and Sharpen the Saw will be introduce and represented throughout our school each month. Our PBIS team will continue to provide all classroom teachers with the habit of the month, accompanied with text dependent questions to support teachers in introducing these habits to our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the attendance rate, as reported in ATS. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All staff will participate in continued LIM professional development, , to align and sustain staff's focus and understanding of enhancing school culture and building positive relationships, aimed to influence positive behavior choices among students. All staff will engage in professional development around the implementation of Morning Meetings and Closing Circles with the goal to build relationships with students, while fostering positive relationships among students. This will create an environment in which students are happy, safe and desires to be present every day. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students 9/18-6/19 Administrators Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Crisis Intervention Team, Leader In Me Specialist, PBIS Team All Students 9/18-6/19 Classroom Teachers Daily Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Crisis intervention Team Attendance Coordinator, Attendance Teacher, Attendance Team Attendance Team, Attendance Teacher The attendance team will meet weekly to coordinate activities of all attendance staff as well as establish a protocol and clear expectations regarding roles and responsibilities All Students 9/18-6/19 All Teachers Weekly Teachers will receive professional development on: All Students 9/18-6/19 1)-Accurate and timely recording of daily attendance. All Teachers 2)- Outreach; assist the re-entry of students. 3)-Use attendance data to inform instruction. 4)-How to manage the impact of absences on the social-emotional well being of students. 2018-19 CEP 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the use of the Principal's newsletter and grade level newsletters, parents will be informed about the current Habit being explored throughout the month. Grade-level newsletters will also spotlight students for their academic and social-emotional growth. In addition, parents will engage in SLC's with their child(ren) and teacher(s) during the fall and winter parent teacher conferences . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize funds to establish partnerships with community based organizations who have a background in using scientifically-based strategies for monitoring and developing positive behaviors to support our school staff. We will also use per session funds to support our School Assessment Team and PBIS team in strengthening and enhancing culture, climate and our school-based interventions. Funds will be used to purchase instructional resources for our Leader in Me program such as books and videos. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 1% increase in the attendance rate, as reported in ATS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Attendance Team will meet to analyze students' attendance record to determine trends and intervention support. During this meeting, the team will review Teacher Anecdotal Notes and or logs and strategies implemented. Parents conferences will be held to discuss noticeable trends. The team will determine the need for home visits as another intervention option. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our recent PPO's during the 2017-18 school year, we received a commendation in quality indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development which correlates to the Frameworks Supportive Environment. Specifically at P.S. 253Q all teachers engaged in professional learning opportunities geared towards creating and implementing learning targets to support instructional outcomes. Furthermore the Spring PPO stated: "The principal has created a culture for teachers to meet and share their talents and best practices through teams, professional learning, and inter-visitations. Through lesson study, teacher teams provide data based rationale and analysis of student work that inform their decisions to adjust practice and create goals for groups of students. Administrators and teacher leaders are able to identify distributed leadership structures that are deeply rooted in the daily operation of the school community. A variety of teacher leaders serve as a conduit for teacher input in strategic decisions that affect the overall improvement of teaching and learning. " After delving into the data within our Instructional Leadership Team, Vertical and Horizontal teacher teams, we identified the following next steps to address our priority need of memorializing the data. Our next steps are to further develop a system for teacher teams to continue memorializing their team discussions, outcomes, and next steps to disaggregate and utilize to support school wide goals and student achievement moving forward. This system will provide a resource bank that offers immediate access to all of our school based teacher teams. In addition to the above, our last two School Quality Snapshots identified that we have improved from 86% to 95% in that teachers have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school on designing instructional programs. This has moved our school above the Citywide average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will collaborate in a grade level inquiry based Lesson Study cycle in Mathematics, to enhance formative assessment practices as evidence by a 25% increase in effective teacher ratings component 3d, as evidenced in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will participate in peer Inter-visitation cycles with colleagues demonstrating effective and highly effective practices in Danielson component 3d. All Staff 9/18 -6/19 Administrators (ongoing) Staff The ELL and Special Education Specialists will conduct professional learning opportunities to enhance the knowledge of scientifically based techniques for ELLs and SWDs. The practices will be utilized to create access to the content and support the learners. Teachers will analyze the effectiveness of the practices by engaging in weekly inquiry meetings geared towards analyzing teacher practice and student work. Teacher teams will engage in cycles of inquiry to analyze trends in student performance and pedagogical practices to strengthen their instructional methods, to both capture real time formative assessment techniques as well as analyzing formative assessments, with both aimed at improving teacher practice and overall student achievement. All Staff 9/18-6/19 Administrators, (ongoing) ELL and Special Education Departments Grade Leaders All Staff and students 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Cycle 1: Teachers Sept - Jan. Coaches Cycle 2: Feb. - June Grade Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 25  During each benchmarking cycle, the Math Coach Glenda Miller and PC Phyllis James will host family workshops to inform parents of students' learning targets and goals. There will be a provision of resources that will allow families to monitor progress at home. Additionally, teachers will engage parents in curriculum based materials to increase their understanding of the CCLS and strategies to support the academic and social-emotional development of their children. This includes providing assessment skills that the parents can engage in at home, to support their students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize human resources to provide coverage for inter-visitations as part of the Lesson Study Protocol. This will allow groups of teachers to observe best practices in action, as well as allow for time to discuss and debrief on what was observed. Supplemental instructional materials will be used to foster coherent planning for rigorous instruction. No per session or per diem is allocated, as human resources during the school day will be utilized to support the initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will collaborate in a grade level inquiry based Lesson Study cycle 1 in Mathematics, to enhance formative assessment practices as evidence by a 15% increase in effective teacher ratings component 3d, as evidenced in Advance. Throughout the school year, administration will instructional walks and data debriefs in Advance to determine professional development on a staff and individual basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Throughout the year, formal and informal observations along side lesson plans and student work will be used to assess growth in component 3d. Teachers' lesson plans will also indicate progress in developing enhanced and consistent formative instructional practices. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In direct connection to The Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership, P.S. 253Q has been celebrated within the 2016-2017 Principal's Performance Review for the principals systems for improvement, specifically Quality Review (QR) indicator 1.3 - leveraging resources. The QR states: " The principal makes strategic decisions to support the school's instructional goals. Resources, both human and financial, are prioritized around professional learning of teachers and student learning." This data is further supported in the past two year School Quality Snapshots, in which P.S. 253Q improved from 79% to 95% related to setting and communicating a clear instructional vision to teachers, and 71% to 85% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels. Both indicators for 2016-17 are above the citywide averages. School wide decisions have been made to address identified needs through the analysis of multiple data points, including but limited to state wide exams, interim assessments as well as Advance. Data is used to provide teachers with feedback that articulates clear expectations for teacher practice and supports teacher development. As a school, we work to develop instructional practices that are aligned to the requirements of the Common Core Learning Standards to make all students college and career ready. Our program structure enables teachers to engage in ongoing collaborative analysis of their current practices with specific focus on entry points for ELLs and SWDs. To address the needs of staff and promote an environment of continuous learning, targeted professional development is provided to support the development of effective teacher practices. Teachers are empowered to demonstrate their collaborative strengths through our lesson studies in Mathematics and ELA. Additionally, staff has visited identified benchmark schools implementing the Teachers College Curriculum, to turnkey to staff for improvement in reading and writing strategies across all grades. All of the professional learning opportunities will be designed and geared towards not only improving teacher practice, but also student outcomes. Through the identified professional development opportunities, staff is provided latitude to implement and provide feedback for improvement, adding to the social emotional support needed by staff in order to drive and attain student achievement. An additional needed identified was a need to memorialize the work done by the inquiry teams, staff overall to provide a data trail and time line to reference as needed. Capturing the work will allow not only accessible data, but access to resources of best practices for all staff members to utilize as needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 27  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June2019, there will be a 5% increase in teachers functioning in a leaderships capacity to advance school wide pedagogical practices as evidenced by advance ratings and student outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Administration will develop and provide professional development of an electronic database to record grade wide inquiry meetings, including goals and next steps to provide access to support ongoing discussions around student success. Based on gathered data and trends within the classes, leadership will collaborate with teachers to identify and focus on an identified subgroup within their classes to engage in targeted small group instruction 1x per week during their scheduled professional period School leaders will customize support based on formal and informal observations and provide professional learning opportunities to meet the needs of individual teachers aligned with Danielson’s Framework for Teaching to foster professional growth in teachers. (i.e. targeted professional development, Model Teacher mentoring, inter-visitations, coaching) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators Coaches Model Teacher SWD 9/18-6/19 Administrators ELL Teachers Lowest Third Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators Coaches Mentors Model Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 253Q administration and staff will collaborate with the School Leadership Team Parents during monthly meetings to design workshops that will further enhance parents' ability to further the academic and social-emotional development of their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize the human capital within the building to provide teacher coverage, to allow identified PK – 5 teachers the opportunity to attend professional development sessions in support of the goal above. Additionally teachers will follow up with discussions and next steps with their colleagues during professional learning times. Furthermore, we 2018-19 CEP 29  will provide parent workshops, providing strategies to support our reading, writing, and social-emotional goals for students. Lastly, per session will be provided for teachers to conduct parent meetings aligned to our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in teachers functioning in a leaderships capacity to advance school wide pedagogical practices as evidenced by advance ratings and student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Lesson Plans Advance ratings Student work products Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Current data including self reflective sign-in sheets reflects an increase in parent attendance at school wide monthly events. Ongoing communication between parents and teachers has grown through the following platforms: Class Dojo, Remind and Parent-Teacher conferences. We provide invitations to Math and ELA workshops facilitated by our instructional coaches to foster better understanding of the Common Core Grade Level Standards and expectations. We also offer curriculum based events, facilitated by our teachers, to communicate current areas of study and strategies for supporting their children. ● Customized student progress reports are issued to parents, detailing information regarding their child's reading and math levels  Every Tuesday during parent engagement, parents are invited to meet with their child’s teacher to discuss their child’s progress and strategies they can use to support their child’s learning at home. ● Every other month the school organizes a Family Night event. Family Night allows the parents, students, and staff to join together as one family and enjoy a warm dinner. During this event, our families interact with each other as they participate in different events such as art, games, and sports. Staff members volunteer to support our Family Night. In addition, we invite community partners to present information that addresses supporting student's social-emotional development.  Monthly calendars  Principal’s Newsletter  Teachers’ Newsletters   Weekly robo-call, whereby the Principal's message is recorded and parents receive a phone call with such School website twice on the weekend. These means of communication allows the parents to be aware of the events that are occurring in the school. Additionally, our parents are invited to join the Principal for Tuesday’s Tea & Talk, every 3rd Tuesday of the month. Parents are given an opportunity to discuss and address any concerns regarding their child’s education. Parents are also encouraged to highlight areas that they are excited about and what they would like to see continue here in our building. In addition to self reflective measures, our past two years School Quality Snapshot has identified that both our parents and teacher feel that a strong bond has been established between parents and the school community. At P.S. 253Q, our goal is to engage our parents in effective planning and reciprocation. We recognize and highly value the role of Parents as Partners as we secure students on their pathways towards success. Increased parent 2018-19 CEP 31  participation remains to be a priority for the 2018-2019 school year. P.S. 253Q welcomes the collaborative journey with parents, teachers, and students, leading towards enhancing outcomes for all stakeholders. Even with the opportunities to engage and welcome our families, there is still a need to increase parental involvement in curriculum and instruction activities that support the parents and their children. By implementing new initiatives, such as class parents, parents will have the opportunity to form stronger partnerships with the teachers while engaging in Common Core aligned instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the parent engagement, which will be measured and evidenced by attendance sheets and participation of various stakeholders at school based activities, workshops, parent/guardian volunteerism and classroom communications via selected school wide mediums. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Principal will engage parents in a monthly Tea and Talk, providing an opportunity for parents to discuss any concerns, celebrations, or suggested enhancements to support student success. P.S. 253Q’s ELL Specialists, Teachers and Community Based Organizations will link school and home initiatives by engaging families of our ELL and SWD populations in workshops to provide effective strategies they may use at home to support the academic progression of students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents 9/17-6/18 Principal (monthly) Parents 9/17-6/18 ENL Specialists ELLs (ongoing) Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator SWDs Monthly initiatives will be designed to increase parent volunteers (class parents) and strengthen school and family relationships through coordinated efforts with New York Cares. Parents will take an active role in planning and leading activities that will benefit students and/or families. Parents 9/17-6/18 Administration (monthly) Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor Staff P.S. 253Q’s will provide our parents with timely data regarding the progress students are making towards the Common Core Learning Standards through quarterly progress reports and access to day to day support to help students master these standards through customized digit tutors for both ELA and Math via RAZ-Kids and GoMath Digital Path Personal Math Tutor. Parents 9/17-6/18 Principal (ongoing) All Staff . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Ongoing partnerships with the following CBOs and Non Profits(NY Cares, Mentor NY, Marquis Studios, Sheltering Arms), we are able to facilitate meeting the needs of our families. Thus establishing a trusting relationship, which we anticipate will yield an increase in parental engagement. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize our current CBOs financial support as well as human capital to design parent workshops based on identified areas through but not limited to our learning environment survey and PTA meetings. Additionally all students and parents will be provided access to School wide programs, including Go Math and Raz-Kids. We will also continue to develop dialogue with all our parents through School CNXT, Class Dojo and newsletters. Through these mediums we will keep parents aware of all events and volunteering opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the parent engagement, which will be measured and evidenced by attendance sheets and participation of various stakeholders at school based activities, workshops, parent/guardian volunteerism and classroom communications via selected school wide mediums. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. There will be an increase in parent committees in SLT to plan and coordinate school initiatives designed to support student success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-2 Students identified as more than3 levels below the grade expectations as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment * Grades 3-5 All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a level 3/proficient on the ELA State assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Ready Gen Spalding Whole Group Instruction Close Reading Instruction Questioning and Discussion Techniques Think/Pair/Share Guided Reading Instruction Reading and Writing Conferences Student Learning Centered Activities/Tasks On Demand Writing Whole Group Writing Instruction Peer Revising and Editing Writing Process Small Group Instruction –{Guided Reading/Writing} (no more than 6 students) SETSS – Small Group push-in /pull-out (no more than8 students) RTI – Small Group: Tier 2 (no more than 10 students) Tier 3 ( no more than 5) Afterschool Small Group (no more than 15 students) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During Regular Instruction Professional Periods Small Group Instruction – During the School Day: 15 minutes 3 times/day as part of our Core Program for All students SETSS – During the School Day 45 minutes 3-5 days/week for our student with IEPs During the School Day 45 minutes 2 days/week for our ELL students RTI – During the School Day 30 minutes 3 days/week for our Tier 2 & 3 students in Grades K – 5 2018-19 CEP 35  Mathematics K-2 Teacher and Student Reflection Use of Rubrics for Self and Teacher Assessments/Feedback Performance Task Response to Intervention (RTI) SETSS ENL { Fundations Fountas Leveled Library Go Math Students identified as more than3 levels below the grade expectations as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment * Whole Group and Small Group Instruction Differentiated Math Activities Integrating Math in Literacy Grades 3-5 All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a level 3/proficient on the Math State assessment K-2 Using various/approaches to solving word problems Emphasis on explanations and logical reasoning Go Math Differentiated Activities for ELL’s, RTI Tier 2 and Tier 3 Scope and Sequence Students identified as more than3 levels below the grade Integrate Science in Literacy Science Afterschool – After School 2 hours 3 days/week for our Levels 1 & 2 in Grades 3 – 5 These services are provided through small group instruction, one to one conferencing, peer to peer tutoring. During Regular Instruction Professional Period After-School Programs Inquiry Based Learning Science periods, during the school day. Hands on activities in the science lab and 2018-19 CEP 36  expectations as measured by Hands on Science Project-Based Learning classroom through small group instruction. Explorations/Discovery Project-Based Activities Differentiated Activities/Groups Harcourt Science Program (Alternate Lessons Companion), smart board activities, Real World Videos, Exploration of the scientific method . Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment * Grades 3-5 All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a level 3/proficient on the ELA State assessment Social Studies K-2 Students identified as more than2 levels below the grade expectations as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment * Grades 3-5 All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a level 3/proficient on the ELA State assessment Students receiving more that 3 Behavioral Tracking cards in a4 week period At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Whole and Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction { Houghton } Small Group Instruction – Small Group (no more than 10 students) or Individual One-to-One support {Student-Teacher Conference} Small Group Instruction – During the School Day 15 minutes 3 days/week with flexible groups in Grades PBIS is used to monitor student behavior and promote social and emotional development Teachers monitor Student Behavior using a behavior plan or Class Dojo- a computer PBIS is a School-Wide Behavioral program. During the day Time Group Trips once a month Classroom Teachers Used the Class Dojo/Behavior Management Plan At-Risk Students receive counseling 3-2018-19 CEP 37  program used to monitor student behavior. 4 times a week (no more than 5 students) One-and one student counseling Committee with an elected president, vice president and other members 2 students were selected from a pool of applicants to be news announcers Leader In Me is a Character Education program to teach and reinforce our school’s behavioral expectations Student Council fosters social and leadership skills Green Team promotes responsibility and Green Team promotes responsibility and school spirit Morning Announcers have the opportunities to build their communication, writing, and leadership skills Students receive guidance at-risk services consisting of: individual and group counseling to address personal issues, peer conflicts, academic issues, outside referrals, administration for children services intervention, foster agencies/family issues. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) During the 2017-2018 school year, 85 students were identified as "doubled up". 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In order to support our STH population, we provide our students with access to basic supplies that students need in order to be prepared for instruction on a daily basis. All students are provided with breakfast and lunch daily. As needed, we ensure students in temporary housing have access to uniforms and school supplies. In addition, we provide these students with access to extended day programs, such as homework help, extracurricular, or academic programs to keep them engaged in academic or social-emotional based activities. At-risk counseling services are available for students and are provided by the guidance counselor or social worker. Our parent coordinator provides the families with informative resources to support their transitions to permanent housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers. ● The pupil personnel secretary will work closely with the Field Support Center-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. ● Formative feedback will be given in a timely fashion to staff ● Feedback will result in improvement in teacher practice. ● Feedback and next steps will be monitored and documented for each teacher. Through professional development, we will develop shared norms among school leaders and teachers for engaging in feedback conversations 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● The Administration, Teachers, Support specialists, systematically conduct professional development sessions, inter-visitations and demonstration lessons. These provide the staff with strategies to assess and improve student achievement and outcomes. Each grade has its prep period at the same time each day. This allows the teachers to meet and discuss methodologies that would allow students to achieve. In addition, monthly grade conferences are held in order to monitor and address the particular needs of the teachers and students. Monthly faculty conferences are also used to provide PD. Educators are also provided with additional opportunities to attend PD sponsored by the DOE, Field Support Center, and/or other educational entities. ● We offer ongoing professional development to increase teachers’ skills in best practices to improve student behavior and sound pedagogical techniques in teaching students with disabilities. Our professional development (PD) 2018-19 CEP 41  is based upon data informing staff and administration of students’ needs and geared towards sound research validated practices. All PD will be matched to curriculum content and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. ● Our school retains and develops highly qualified teachers by guiding their work through collaboration with the teachers on their grade, PD, and assistance from specialists. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Hosting two Pre-K classes in our school allows students to transition smoothly from into our elementary school. For those students who are coming from other preschool sites, our transition services include: ● Parent involvement activities that include workshops, trips, in school activities; ● Pre-K Social worker to address the needs of families ● Sharing of records/information from the preschool to PS 253Q; ● Following up on early intervention services and providing similar services if mandated; ● Articulation with the local community based organizations that provide services to Pre-K students. ● “Welcome to PS 253Q Curriculum Night” which is an overview of PS 253Q’s mission, vision, curriculum At the conclusion of this academic year, to assist in the transition of preschool children to elementary school programs, Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers collaborated to align their curriculum to ensure prerequisite skills based on the standards being addressed. During the 2018-2019 academic year, teachers of Pre-K will again collaborate with 2018-19 CEP 42  teachers of Kindergarten to ensure that prerequisite skills are being addressed. By opening these lines of communication, the teachers of both grades are informed about the high expectations set forth in each grade level. In addition, Pre-K parent forums and workshops are scheduled throughout the year to foster a school-home connection. The workshops inform the parents of what is being taught in Pre-K, what they should expect to see from the students, child development, and how to support the students at home. Parents also receive monthly newsletters to keep them informed of what the students are learning. For students entering Pre-K in the fall, the families are invited to attend an open house where they are presented with information about the school, the curriculum, standards and services. The families also engage in classroom visitations and receive a tour of the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Decision making progress: Coming to a consensus on the common formative assessments that will be used from the optional Assessments in the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (K-2) and the ReadyGEN assessments (formative, performance based assessments, end of unit tests(3-5)) ● Based on several units of study, teachers select: Quarterly benchmark assessments, Common Core aligned Monthly Unit assessments, In math monthly performance tasks, mid unit check point assessments, weekly/bi-weekly quizzes, and Quarterly instructional projects. Professional Development in Math includes analyzing baseline and benchmark assessments through an item analysis of skills and standards test, identifying the lowest third, identifying strengths and weaknesses in a class across grades, setting measurable student, group and class goals based on results from assessments, and providing appropriate RTI activities to meet the needs of each student. In ELA professional development includes identifying the DOK levels of PBA’s, the formulation of groups within a class to address the multiple entry points, the identification of students in specific subgroups, developing rubrics and looking at student work during the inquiry process 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 43  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) N/A 5a;5b;5c;5d;5e 5a;5b;5c;5d;5e N/A 5a;5b;5c;5d;5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A 67,796.00 22,478.00 N/A 3,454,866.00 N/A X X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 44   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.253Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 253Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● encouraging more parents to become school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 253Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 48  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, P. S. 253Q will host a before school and afterschool enrichment program for ELLs. It will start in the middle of December and conclude in May. Students serviced in this program will include ENL students and ELL students with disabilities. The before school program will be held on Thursday and Friday mornings from 7 a.m. to 8 a.m. which is 2 hours per week. It will be for ELLs in 2nd grade. There will be 2 classes of students. We will meet in groups of 15. Our students will be grouped according to NYSESLAT levels(Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding) as well as F&P Benchmark levels. Collectively this morning opportunity enables us to provide services to 30 ELL students. The afterschool program will be on Wednesdays and Thursdays each week from 2:30 - 4:00 p.m. There will be 45 sessions with 4 hours each week. The afternoon program will cater to the needs of our ELL students in grades 1 and 2. There will be 15 students in each group. We will group students according to their NYSESLAT levels(Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding). The students will consist of SWD, ELLs (4-6 years)and SIFE. There will be one group of Entering/Emerging students in grade 3 and one group of Transitioning/Expanding students from Grade 3 and 4. We will provide intensive instruction to each group simultatneously targeting content and literacy areas that the students need assistance. Data sources including: AMAOs, NYSESLAT scores, ELA scores, NYS math scores,F and P levels and other benchmarking assessments will be analyzed to determine students’ needs. There will be 45 students in the program for grades 1 and 2 and a total of 75 ELLs . It will include 3 ESL teacher with ESL certification. At each session, the ESL teachers will provide instruction to the two groups of students. The program will include math, literacy and content area topics. Differentiated instruction will be used to meet the needs of all levels of students. Some of the strategies include native language support, scaffolding such as modeling, graphic organizers, picture walk discussion, think-pair-share, prompts and sentence starters. We will also use prior knowledge and text representations (transform words into pictures). For the beginners and newcomers, we will use picture walk discussions, native language support and sentence starters. For the transitioning level students, we will use modeling, graphic organizers, think-pair-share and prior knowledge strategies. For the expanding ELL students, we will use graphic organizers, prior knowledge, think-pair- share and text representations as strategies to aid in comprehension and language learning. The language of instruction is English. The following books and materials will be used in the Title III program:Options Comprehension Strategies Kits A and B, Hot Topics and Time For Kids Non-Fiction Readers and Talk About Books. This program is designed to help raise the level of comprehension, speaking and listening skills as well as students' confidence as they grow in the English language. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Flyers will be sent home in English and the student’s native language to notify parents of the programs. Attendance will be taken on an attendance form. Copies of the flyers and attendance forms will be kept in the office as well as with the teachers who are implementing the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Staff Development will occur once a month for 45 minutes every third Monday of the month from 2:30 - 3:15 pm. There will be four sessions. Teachers will receive professional development instruction from the Literacy Coach, Math Coach and ESL teachers in terms of content taught and strategies used to help the ELLs in the Title III Program. One of the professional development sessions will be called, "Strategies for Working with ELLs in Literacy". The presenters will be Ms. Cela and Ms. Disler. Ms. Cela and Ms. Disler have a TESOL license. Another professional development session will be called, "Math strategies for ELLs" which will be presented by Glenda Miller (Math Coach).The math coach has a General Ed. license and Admin license. All teachers and support personnel working in the Title III program will attend all the staff development sessions. ESL teachers providing Title III services will be trained in ELA and math. ESL study groups will take place to determine best practices and best strategies to meet the needs of each student. Action Plans will be worked on as well. Agendas and attendance sheets for each session will be kept in the office. The PDs will positively impact the progress of ELLs by giving the teachers a variety of strategies to help all of our ELLs including SWDs and SIFE students, progress towards proficiency. . Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Before the program begins, a meeting with parents will take place entitled, "Afterschool Parent Orientation". Parents will be notified of what their children will be doing in the afterschool program, what the children are expected to learn and what parents are expected to do at home to help their children. Parents will be given resources and guides to better support their children at home. Parents will be given an opportunity to learn what their children are learning as the ESL teachers expose them to samples of work at each grade level. The second workshop will be entitled,"Helping Your Child at Home". This meeting will be conducted by the ESL teachers. The parents will be notified of this meeting through letters sent 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities home in their native language and phone calls . The schedule of parent engagement activities will be as follows: November 2018 Afterschool Parent Orientation Ms. Cyd Disler, ESL Teacher/Ms.Jugena Cela,ESL January 2019 Goal Setting Ms.Cyd Disler, ESL Teacher/Ms. Jugena Cela ,ESLThird Week of March Helping Your Child at Home Ms.Cyd Disler,ESL Teacher/Ms Jugena Cela,ESLThird Week of April Parent Conference and Feedback Ms.Cyd Disler, ESL Teacher/Ms.Jugena Cela, ESL Translators will be available to translate into the parents' native language and electronic translation units will also, be used at these meetings to help support parents in being a part of the conversations. Each parent workshop will be 45-60minutes. There will be four sessions every third Tuesday of the month. Flyers will be sent out in English as well as the parents’ preferred language. Agendas will be given out at each meeting and attendance will be taken. Copies of the flyers, the agendas and the attendance sheet will be kept in the office and in the room of the teachers implementing the program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL - - - 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name P.S. 253 Queens Borough Queens School Number 253 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Phoebe Grant Robinson Coach Glenda Miller ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cyd Disler/Jugena Cela-ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Christina Perez Related-Service Provider Claudia Morris Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Matthew Goodman/Candra Sutherl Coach School Counselor Vanesa Santos Parent Renee Moore Parent Coordinator Jean-Marie Fougere Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 572 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 225 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 39.34%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that are used to assess the early literacy skills at our school include Fountas and Pinnell, in-house assessments, Estrellita and performance tasks. The data provides insights into the type of instruction, what needs to be taught and what areas the children have mastered. It also tells us which students have not mastered specific skills or concepts and need additional assistance. It provides the teachers with insights into the reading level the students are on at each grade level so the teachers know how many students are on grade level in reading, how many are below grade level and how many are on grade level. It tells us whether students use higher order thinking skills when reading. It also shows which students need more help meeting CCLS. The data shows that most of the ELL's are far below grade level in the beginning and intermediate levels and approaching grade level in the advanced levels of proficiency. In grade 3, the data shows that 14 out of 21 scored a level 1 on the NYS ELA and in grade 3, 13 out of 24 scored a level 1 on the NYS ELA. The data helps inform the school's instructional plan by showing areas of need in the literacy program and helps us target which students need additional intervention. It also shows whether the programs in place are working to meet the students ' educational needs. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that are in place include F&P three times a year, Estrellita benchmark and end of the year assessment, unit tests in both math and ELA, and performance tasks throughout the year. Our math and ELA coach oversee this process throughout the year and support the teachers when needed. After each assessment the data is disaggregated and the teachers meet to discuss the outcome, and how to use it to inform next steps in instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program and Dual Language program by studying assessment data. We look at informal assessments and formal assessments such as the NYSESLAT, New York State ELA exams, New York State Math Exams, NY State Science tests, Performance Tasks, MOSL Tests and Fountas and Pinnell Reading levels. In addition, we check to see if we met AYP for the ELL's and our EDAT. We use Fountas and Pinnell three times a year to measure students progress and identify areas of need. We administer a baseline/benchmark F&P three times a year, in October and then again in January and May. In math as a Benchmark assessment we use Renaissance for grades 3-5, and Go Math for grades k-2. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place to address intervention are, AIS services, Reading Rescue program, ENL services as well as teachers utilize the data to pull students for re-teaching and more explicit direct instruction to support their identified deficiencies. These services are determined by reviewing data from the NYSESLAT math and ELA state-testing as well as informal assessments. Every few months the data team reviews academic progression among students and determines next steps. The above mentioned supports are constantly reflected upon and refined to best support our population. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to guide instruction for ELL's within the Response to Intervention framework, the classroom teachers monitor the students at the Tier I level. They provide meaningful lessons, set challenging academic goals and build abilities through dialogue, questioning and sharing ideas. At this level, the teacher uses unit tests, performance tasks, classroom assignments and class participation to determine who needs further assistance. The teachers use the data from these assessments to see which students have not mastered certain skills or concepts and need to be re- taught. On the Tier II and III levels, the ENL teacher, SETTS teacher and AIS teacher provide more targeted instruction and additional academic support to help students. Data such as class work, checklists, exit slips, class participation, formal and informal assessments in these smaller groups is evaluated to see if the child is progressing successfully with this extra assistance. Classroom teachers work with out of classroom personnel to improve the Tier II and III services. The out of classroom teacher uses different strategies to try to help students master skills and concepts. If the child still does not make any progress, the teacher meets with the School Based Support team. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that most entering and emerging are in the Kindergarten and grade 1. There are only a few beginners in grades 2-5. Grades 2 , 3 and 4 have the most transitioning and expanding students on the NYSESLAT. More needs to be done in grades 3-4 to move our students from transitioning and expanding to commanding. This means that for some students we need to focus on vocabulary development, reading comprehension and writing. Other students need to spend more time developing listening and speaking skills. On the NYSITELL, we have very few students in the intermediate proficiency level and a large group in the beginning and advanced levels. This shows us that the children who are new to our school, have different skill levels and that the teacher must address these differences in order to help these children reach proficient levels in English. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data team constantly disseminates data findings. In October we review the EDAT to determine areas of need and make programmatic adjustment. Once the data team has determined areas of need, they share their findings in a school wide PD. 2018-19 CEP 59  After ,the data team meets with teachers in inquiry team meetings to create an action plan and make adjustments to the programs provided for the students. Throughout the year the data team also reviews data collected from benchmark assessments as well as formal and informal assessments in order to identify student progress as well as areas of need and make adjustments as needed. In support of all of the above mentioned, we believe that their progress is fluid and we are constantly discussing steps to best support students to meet them at their current levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The freestanding ENL program has a push-in/pull -out model for the integrated and standalone services. The ENL program is implemented as per Part 154.2 in that standalone ESL will develop language skills so that students will succeed in content areas. Integrated ESL will build language skills through content areas. The students are grouped together heterogeneously in that there are mixed proficiency levels in each group. The students are also grouped by grade. Stand-alone ENL services are provided through pull outs, where students work with certified ENL teacher in small groups. Integrated ENL services are provided through push in. The ENL teacher pushes in the classroom in order to support ENL students. b. TBE program. If applicable. The school has no TBE program c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language Program has mixed proficiency levels (heterogeneous grouping). The bilingual classroom teacher will provide ENL services. As per Part 154.2, standalone and integrated ENL services will be provided during ELA and English content area instruction. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL for the Entering and Emerging students. These students receive 180 minutes of standalone services by a certified ENL teacher and 180 minutes of integrated ENL services by two individually certified teachers(co-teaching). The transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes . The transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of flexible ENL instruction. The expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. The commanding students will receive 90 minutes of ENL services. These services are built into their daily schedules. HLA is taught in our Dual Language Program 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. In the ENL program, all content areas are taught in English using current approaches and methods. We use a hands on, visual and auditory method in order to include all 4 modalities of learning(listening,speaking, reading and writing). Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response, Q-TEL, Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Core Instruction and CALLA are also methodologies that are used to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards. The ESL program uses English to teach the students. ReadyGen, Time for Kids, Hot Topics and Comprehension Strategies Kit as well as Go Math are used to teach the ELL students content area knowledge, concepts, literacy and thinking 2018-19 CEP 60  skills. In the Dual Language Program, the core content areas are taught in both English and Spanish. Instruction is alternated each day between Spanish and English. The lessons build on each other each day. The ENL strategies that are used include SIOP, Q-TEL, Language Experience Approach, CALLA and Linguistically Responsive Core Instruction. The Bilingual approaches and methods used are linguistic modification, extra-linguistic cues such as visuals, props and body language, cooperative learning strategies and thematic approach. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who come to school for the first time are given the Spanish LAB after they are tested on the NYSITELL and are entering,emerging, transitioning, or expanding. Native language tests for students are made available when needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. SIFE students would be given individual instruction using phonics instruction, grammar, developing listening skills along with reading and writing. Number sense and basic math skills would also be part of the daily curriculum. 6b. Students receiving services for less than 3 years would receive instruction in oral language skills, writing, reading and developing listening skills. ELL's taking ELA tests would require instruction focused mainly on reading, reading comprehension, answering questions and writing. 6c. Our plan for ELL's receiving service for 4 to 6 years would focus on vocabulary building, reading comprehension, writing skills and listening skills and developing speaking skills. We also provide these children with a great deal of reading materials of different genres. ESL strategies will be used such as CALLA and Q-TEL.6d. Our plan for long term ELL's includes receiving intervention services both in and out of the classroom. After school enrichment programs along with classroom instructional plan of action that is tailored to the students' needs. The student will be provided with a variety of reading materials from different genres. We will provide strategies to develop comprehension and language acquisition.6e. Former ELL's (in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient will receive additional ESL intervention in the classroom. These students will be given additional literacy and content area support for 2 years. They will attend the after school program for enrichment. and AIS support. The students will, also, have an instructional plan of action to help them. They will also receive testing accommodations for 2 years. These accommodations are time and a half on all New York State tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are provided with plenty of visuals and dramatized reading material. Total Physical Response methodologies building academic vocabulary, simplifying content and concept knowledge are ways to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. The technology that is used to help these students includes Smart Boards, CD players and computers. The ENL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the Assistant Principal and/or the Principal to make sure ELL-SWDs get the correct ELL services. In some cases, a Bilingual Assistant helps the student in class throughout the day. The ELL- SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as the mainstream students. However, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the student's abilities and on the IEP. Some students may need simplified instruction using only one or two words while others may need simpler language or have the task broken down into smaller components. Furthermore, multiple intelligence problem solving strategies are also used by teachers to promote academic success. These strategies include linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal and naturalistic. In addition, the ELL-SWDs use the grade appropriate ReadyGen program for ELA instruction and Go-Math is used for math instruction. The students in the Dual Language program and the newcomers are provided with Spanish Go-Math b books. During math instruction, student use manipulatives to foster concept development. 2018-19 CEP 61  Students who have difficulties understanding specific math concepts and given special re-teach worksheets. Those that do master a concept are given work on a higher level to promote application of the concept. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and schedule flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment through Saturday School, after school programs, small group instruction, trips, special events like Field Day, lunch time and recess. The ELL-SWD are in the same classes with the mainstream students in Saturday School , after school programs and in small group instruction. P.S. 253 ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers through meetings between the general education teachers, special education teachers, the out of classroom teachers, SETTS teacher and School Based Support Team as well as the administration. At lunch time, ELL's -SWDs eat at the same tables and at the same time as the non-disabled students. They also play together at recess. By encouraging mainstream children to interact with ELL-SWDs, we are able to help these children achieve their IEP goals. : 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 10. Our intervention plans for ELL's include AIS (Academic intervention services) and RTI ( Response to intervention). There are after school programs to work with students in grades 3-5 who are performing at Level 1 in math and/or literacy. These ELL students are entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding students who are below level on assessments, performance tasks and state tests. Our math and literacy specialists are very active and provide small group instruction for students who need additional support. Modeling strategies are used in Math, Literacy, Science and Social Studies. Other interventions include instructing students in academic language and writing non-fiction pieces. Differentiating instruction , simplifying language, simplified reading materials, using graphic organizers and pictures are also used in targeted intervention programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 11. For the next school year, we plan on continuing after school enrichment. The data to support these programs includes binders that show progress and scores on the assessments. In 2014, we started a Dual Language program in Kindergarten. In September 2015, we added a new Dual Language class in Grade 1 to provide support to the ELL's. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services will be discontinued for ELL's since the children have shown improvements in all academic areas. : 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are welcome to join in any activities that the school provides. The classroom teachers, ELL teachers, Administration and Parent Coordinator send translated letters home telling parents about the programs and calling parents to encourage them to send their children to these programs. Signs are posted outside the school as well. There are specific programs tailored to the needs of the ELL population. The school offers an after school program for grades 1 to 5. The RTI program is also available for those students who need academic support services. The goals of these programs are to help the student in literacy, math and content area subjects through the use of supplemental activities and materials designed to improve the student's knowledge base and improve strategies to decode words, solve mathematical problems as well as improve comprehension in reading and academic language. Other services include Free Airways for asthma students, programs with the guidance counselor and parent coordinator, career day, and special performances in the auditorium. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently, we are using the Spalding phonics program , ReadyGen and Go Math. We also have On Our Way to English, ESL series, Mondo, Focused Reading Intervention Time for Kids Non-Fiction Readers and Hot Topics. Houghton Mifflin Social 2018-19 CEP 62  Studies Series, Science Harcourt curriculum, Journey Reading series for grades 3-6, and Spelling books. In terms of technology, the students use computers and Smart Boards. They research subjects on the Internet. They play Internet games that reinforce math and literacy skills. Currently we are using Imagine Learning and Raz kids to support our students in ELA. In addition to support our students in math we are using Renaissance and STmath computer based programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is used in ENL classes on a need basis. Spanish story books and Spanish content area books are available in classrooms where there are ELL's. Math worksheets are available to students and teachers to assist non-English speaking students. There are also English/Spanish picture dictionaries to assist these students as well. For The Dual Language Program, we use Estrellita phonics and trade-books in English and Spanish. We, also, use Spanish math books. At present, we do not have a transitional bilingual program. If we did, we would have story books in the native language as well as content books in the native language . This would help students learn to read and further their concept development in their native language. Language arts books would also be needed to assist in NLA. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The support services are based on student needs, assessments and teacher input. Teachers, Administrators and other personnel take into consideration the students age and grade level in deciding whether an ELL student needs additional support services and which ones they need developmentally. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, we are using the Spalding phonics program , ReadyGen and Go Math. We also have On Our Way to English, ESL series, Mondo, Focused Reading Intervention Time for Kids Non-Fiction Readers and Hot Topics. Houghton Mifflin Social Studies Series, Science Harcourt curriculum, Journey Reading series for grades 3-6, and Spelling books. In terms of technology, the students use computers and Smart Boards. They research subjects on the Internet. They play Internet games that reinforce math and literacy skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and students are given a tour of the building. They also have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teachers, support staff, Administrators and parent coordinator to express any concerns or needs before the child comes into the building. School staff involved in such activities include ENL specialists, bilingual teachers, parent coordinator, school administrators, guidance counselor, and other school staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The Dual Language model that our school uses is self- contained. Fifty percent of the instructional day is in Spanish and fifty percent of the instructional day is in English.b. Math, science and social studies are taught in both languages.c. Each language is separated for instruction by using English for the first half of the day and using Spanish for the second half of the day. Also, the room is divided into two sides. There is a Spanish language side and an English language side.d. Both languages are taught at the same time 2018-19 CEP 63  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1.Professional development at our school for ELL personnel include attending ELL meetings in Queens region as well as meetings held at P.S. 253. Training is given to teachers of ELL's and non-ELL's, guidance counselor, paraprofessionals, Assistant Principals on the topics of how children become ELLs, NYS standards and mandates, language acquisition theory, ESL methodologies and strategies such as LEA,TPR, CALLA and Q-TEL, strategies to help students in math, tips for helping ELL's with the CCLS in the classroom, RTI for ELL's and NYSESLAT testing and data evaluation. The ENL teachers provide classroom teachers with strategies and insights so that the ELL's students in the class can master common core standards. These professional developments are done during staff development days such as Election day, and Brooklyn Queens Day. It is also done during grade meetings and during faculty conferences. The calendar for the profession development isOctober 1,2017- How do students become EL'Ls?November 5,2017 Strategies and Research in ESLDecember 2, 2017 NYS standards and mandatesJanuary 6, 2018 Language Acquisition Theory and ESL MethodologiesFebruary 3,2018 ELL's and the NYSESLATMarch 3,2018 RTI for ELLSApril 1, 2018 Tips for helping our ELL's with the CCLSJune 12, Data for the ELL's Attendance is taken for these meetings and agendas are given out.: The professional development that is offered to teachers of ELL's in supporting ELL's as they engage in CCLS includes providing insights and strategies to help students answer questions, comprehend information taught as well as ways to provide help to those who have difficulties learning concepts. These professional developments include how to teach children to answer different kinds of questions,what information is needed to answer certain questions, simplifying language and text and vocabulary development These activities help teachers provide support to ELL students in class because the teachers have strategies to help students master the material taught and assist students in developing academic language. By doing this, students will be able to succeed in the Common Core classroom because they will have strategies that the teachers have given them. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support that we provide to staff(teachers and guidance counselors) to assist with the transition from elementary to middle school includes data on students and Portfolio assessments as well as binder assessments. The staff also has access to the ARIS link. The teachers and parent coordinator are also supported by the school leadership when dealing with parents who have difficulties with the process of applying to middle school and finding the right middle school for their child. The guidance counselor is given professional development on the NYSESLAT and reading the NYSESLAT scores from the ATS as well as information on ARIS for the ELL students. The ENL teachers also meet with guidance counselor to explain potential difficulties ELL parents and children may have in going to middle school and finding the right middle school. The guidance counselor provides professional development to appropriate staff members regarding application process, local middle schools and the requirements as well concerns parents may have. 15% of total hours of ELL training for all teachers and 50% hours for Bilingual Education/ ENL teachers will include in-house PDs, District workshops and DELL's Citywide workshops. Teachers and paraprofessionals will be provided with professional development on the process of becoming an English Language Learner, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing, the new CR-Part 154 Second Language Acquisition Theory, Strategies and Methodologies in ESL, Programs for ELL's, helping students meet the CCLS, and data for the ELL's. During professional development, teachers will share experiences and strategies that were successful in their classrooms. Teachers will brainstorm strategies that will further assist their ELL's. This is done on Staff Development days and grade meeting and conferences. Attendance sheets and agendas will be kept on file for all in-house staff workshops. A spread sheet will be kept of teachers and professional development that they have attended as well as the number of hours that they have complete and the number remaining hours needed. 2018-19 CEP 64  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meeting with parents of ELL's to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs by calling parents and sending home notices in their home language. Translators are available at the school as well as the DOE translation unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We currently;y have a parent engagement ARTS ELL Grant through Marquis Studio. The grant provided 10 Saturday Arts programs for parents and students to engage in an activity together. The program is intended to bridge the gap between student and parent involvement when it comes to promoting student growth in and out of the classroom for this population. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Over the past three years, we have shown growth in all four modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing. We have made data driven decisions, to integrate more on level text, adapted to our individual groups, to support our population of more transitioning and expanding ELL students than the past. We also have supplemented our curriculum with text that utilize more academic vocabulary to support their comprehension on assessments. The data has indicated that these decisions have paid off, as we are seeing more students score commanding on the end of the year NYSESLAT. Our data also shows that most of our ELL students have made significant gains in ELA and math as well. All these have been achieved through communication and collaboration between ELL and classroom teachers. They have skilfully differentiated their instruction based on data and student progress. https://nycdoe-my.sharepoint.com/personal/mgoodman5_schools_nyc_gov/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?id=%2Fsites%2Fps253administration%2FShared%20Documents%2FLAP%20Plan%202017-2018&listurl=https%3A%2F%2Fnycdoe%2Esharepoint%2Ecom%2Fsites%2Fps253administration%2FShared%20Documents 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Phoebe Robinson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 253Q School DBN: 27Q253 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Phoebe Grant Robinson Principal Matthew Goodman/Candra Sutherl Assistant Principal Jean Marie Fougere Parent Coordinator Cyd Disler ENL/Bilingual Teacher Renee Moore Parent Christina Perez Teacher/Subject Area Giselle Wilson Teacher/Subject Area Glenda Miller Immocalata DiBaro Coach Coach Alberys Walsh School Counselor Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jugena Cela Other ENL Teacher Nafiysah Reynolds Other ENL Teacher Other 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q253 School Name: P.S.253Q Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Phyllis James Parent Coordinator YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S.253 uses different methodologies and data to assess language preferences of the parent community including the Part III of the Home Language Survey, student emergency contact cards, ATS reports and informal surveys conducted at our school.. The languages other than English include Spanish, Haitian Creole, French, Bengali and Chinese. All communications to parents are translated into their home languages by support personnel who read, write and speak the appropriate languages. Home language is determined at the time the child is registered for the first time at our school through the use of the Home Language Survey. The ESL teacher or a pedagogue determines the primary language by responses on the survey and through an oral interview. Records are kept in the office of each parent's primary language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 68  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ADANGME ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY HINDI ENGLISH SAMOAN SPANISH TWI URDU 0 1 1 8 1 273 1 259 1 3 0 0.18 0.18 1.46 0.18 49.82 0.18 47.26 0.18 0.55 1 1 1 8 1 271 0 261 1 3 0.18 0.18 0.18 1.46 0.18 49.45 0 47.63 0.18 0.55 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The following documents that require translation at our school are monthly calendars, PTA meeting notifications,newsletters, handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements Fall - introduction in addition to as needed to disseminate information throughout the year After-school information Fall - introduction in addition to as needed to disseminate information throughout the year New York State testing dates, student curriculum information, Fall - introduction in addition to How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Upon approving any English documents, staff works to translate all documents sent home in Spanish using bi-lingual staff and translation services if needed. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord for non-covered languages. Upon approving any English documents, staff works to translate all documents sent home in Spanish using bi-lingual staff and translation services if needed. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord for non-covered languages. Upon approving any English documents, staff works to 2018-19 CEP 69  as needed to disseminate information throughout the year Letters from the principal and teachers, including but not limited too school discipline code information. Fall - introduction in addition to as needed to disseminate information throughout the year translate all documents sent home in Spanish using bi-lingual staff and translation services if needed. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord for non-covered languages. Upon approving any English documents, staff works to translate all documents sent home in Spanish using bi-lingual staff and translation services if needed. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord for non-covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night in September, , Middle School Meetings for Grade 5 in the fall fall interpretation service(s)? Upon entering into a face-to-face meeting, individuals are asked their language preference. When identified, we utilize various staff members prior to contacting translation services. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord, as well as well as the over the phone DOE Translation services for non-covered languages. Upon entering into a face-to-face meeting, individuals are asked their language preference. When identified, we utilize various staff members prior to contacting translation services. parent -teacher conferences in November, March and May November, March and May ELL Workshops in December and March December and March Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord, as well as well as the over the phone DOE Translation services for non-covered languages. Upon entering into a face-to-face meeting, individuals are asked their language preference. When identified, 2018-19 CEP 70  we utilize various staff members prior to contacting translation services. Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord, as well as well as the over the phone DOE Translation services for non-covered languages. Upon entering into a face-to-face meeting, individuals are asked their language preference. When identified, we utilize various staff members prior to contacting translation services. NYS ELA and Math Informational meetings in March. March Additionally we will use the DOE Vendor TheBigWord, as well as well as the over the phone DOE Translation services for non-covered languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. P.S. 253Q utilizes blackboard Connect to send both English and Spanish messages home to families weekly, and in the need of emergency to inform parent about events at the school. In cases of emergencies we additionally send all letters home translated into Spanish for our limited English proficiency population. If needed we also utilize the DOE translation services department if we do not have the language capability on site. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will receive professional development and documentation to support their understanding of chancellors regulation A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 71  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 deals with establishing procedures for making certain LEP parents are given opportunities to participate in and have access to services that will benefit their children. This is accomplished at our school by identifying students and parents who speak another language through the registration process which involves parents filling out the Home Language Survey. An interview is also conducted with the parent and the child at this time. Primary language is determined within 30 days of admission to the school. Records are kept in the office of parents who need translated copies of school calendars, notices, letters, and important school notifications. P.S. 253Q provides and distributes important information in "covered languages "relating to registration, and selection, standards and performance, safety, conduct and discipline, placement in Special Education, ELL or non-standard academic programs as well as for transfers and discharges. The Parents' Bill of Rights is given out to parents in their native language and explained in their native language as well. There are translators in the school and through the DOE Translation Unit that are always ready to help parents. Outside agencies in the community are also available to help non-English speaking parents who require services as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms that P.S. 253Q uses to gather feedback for parents on the quality and availability of services include parent surveys. 2018-19 CEP 72 
