2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q254 School Name: P.S. 254 - THE ROSA PARKS SCHOOL Principal: PAMELA MARKHAM 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 254 - The Rosa Parks School 342700010254 PreK - 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q254 84-40 101 Street, Richmond Hill, NY 11418 718-520-7878 Phone Number: 718-520-7879 Fax: Pamela Markham PMarkha2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Pamela Markham Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gary Fox DianaFarquharson Sherma Feggins Jessica Marrasquin N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 27 Ms. Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Ozone Park, NY 11416 Superintendent’s Office Address: JAmbert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pamela Markham Gary Fox DianaFarquharson Tina DiMaria Jennifer Lambert HeatherSosnovsky Sharon Bherwani ShermaFeggins *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ CSA Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Simone Gray InderaRamnarine Carla Orrego-Melendez Linda Lello Jessica Benitez SheirmaGiler Mike Perez Laura Ariza Christina Heerey Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/PA Member/PA Member/ PA Member/PA Member/PA Member/ PA Member/ PA 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? All members of the Rosa Parks Community are dedicated to the establishment and maintenance of a learning environment that pursues academic achievement, as well as, emotional and social development. This safe and nurturing educational environment will enable all students to learn and develop their unique talents and individual attributes and prepare them for college and their future careers. 2018-19 CEP 9  Parental involvement and community-based partnerships will solidify our ability to develop students who are leaders, problem solvers, critical and independent thinkers, life- long learners, and productive citizens who are able to meet the challenges of the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 254Q is located in the Richmond Hill section of Queens, New York. Our administration, faculty, support staff, parents and community all collaborate to make certain that our students are provided with a rigorous standards-based curriculum and rich experiences. This commitment is evident throughout our community. Our mission is to help our students become leaders, critical thinkers, life-long learners and productive citizens who are able to meet the challenges of the 21st century. In 2007, P.S. 254Q had the privilege of being named after one of the most prolific and courageous American heroes, Rosa Parks. Rosa Parks’ bravery caused the Supreme Court to change unjust laws. The students are taught lessons about this valiant woman and are encouraged to emulate her character traits. The diversity of the student population and our academic excellence are what makes P.S. 254Q a unique and extraordinary school community. Sixteen languages are spoken at our school. 85% of the students are from families who are bilingual and 16% of our population is English Language Learners (ELLs), 75% of our students are Hispanic, and 14% of our students are Students with Disabilities (SWD). Our curriculum, which includes Teachers College Reading and Writing, Go! Math, Science Fusion and Passport to Social Studies, is research and standards-based and multi-culturally inclusive. Instruction and learning are assessed on a continual basis. It is presented in an engaging, differentiated, and challenging way. The gifted are challenged, on level are inspired, and those in need of extra help are fully serviced. The Rosa Parks School has developed an environment where students want to learn, the teachers are enthusiastic to teach and the community and parents are active stakeholders. Our teachers are observed formally and informally on a systematic basis. They are provided with timely and meaningful feedback. Through our observations we see our students working collaboratively, engaging in challenging tasks, having rich conversations, using problem solving skills and applying their newly acquired knowledge to the real world. We make a concerted effort to ensure that each day is a positive experience for our students. Students’ work is displayed throughout the school and celebrated for its merits. Students are celebrated every Tuesday - Tip, Top, Tuesday – for good citizenship. We celebrate achievement with Student of the Month. We celebrate responsibility and good behavior during lunch and recess with the Golden Spoon Challenge. Lastly, we are a Leader in Me school where we develop student leaders! This year we are focusing on early literacy. We have a Universal Literacy Coach who is working with Kindergarten through second grade. We have scheduled an AIS provider to our 1st grade classes. Studies have shown that students progress more when the student/teacher ratio is decreased. The AIS provider co-teaches the lesson. After the whole group instruction, the AIS provider teaches guided reading groups. Using the data that is collected during conferencing, the AIS providers differentiate instruction and helps students increase their understanding of the content and move towards mastery. All students (including the ELLs, SWD, gifted) are provided with small group or one to one instruction with close attention to the students learning styles and providing multiple entry points. P.S. 254Q provides block scheduling for all grades. This allows all teachers in each grade to plan together on a daily basis. Common goals, clear objectives and good teaching strategies are shared in order to make certain that the 2018-19 CEP 10  whole child is developed. Prior to meeting, the team leader works with the administration and instructional coaches to set an agenda via vertical team meetings. Topics of discussion are agreed upon by those in each grade based on the data collected from the week’s instruction, and are set by administration and the team leaders. During common planning, teachers analyze students’ work to identify trends, areas of strengths and areas in need of improvement. The educators will then design change strategies that will help promote student achievement. Finally, the Principal's cabinet, which includes administrators, AIS providers, Instructional Coaches, ENL (English as a New Language) teacher, SWD providers and team leaders, meet to review data and set school-wide goals. Professional Learning Communities (PLC) are a norm in P. S. 254Q. We meet every Monday and Tuesday afternoons to look at student work, analyze data and provide opportunities to learn about additional ways to enhance our teaching practices and school-wide goals. We discuss and suggest good teaching practices/strategies and use data cycles to make certain that students are making progress and are achieving. Teachers are dedicated to continually enhancing and building upon their professional skills. They are provided with numerous opportunities to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to instruct and prepare our students to be ready for this ever-changing world. Our school has many family engagement programs and opportunities. We have a productive Parent Association and School Leadership Team. We have Family Fun Nights, Book of the Month, Math and Testing workshops. We have been participating with New York City Food Bank's CookShop program for nine years. CookShop teaches students and their families how to make healthy food choices and live active lifestyles. Our agricultural and nutrition grants deliver innovative and interactive approaches to bring the world of plants and nutrition to our teachers and students in fun and exciting ways. We communicate with our community through our school's own website, Twitter and Facebook. In the fall of 2016 our school was awarded the Magnet Schools Assistance Grant, thereby becoming The Magnet School of Leadership Development and the Arts. We were awarded this grant for 3 years. With this grant we are able to enhance our academic programs. We are now a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project school, we are a Leader in Me school and we have a professional development plan with Marilyn Burns' Math Solutions. The grant has afforded us the ability to purchase software and hardware to enhance our students learning and more. In addition to the Magnet Grant, our school is a Computer Science for All and an Algebra for All school. Last year our school ran a Saturday STEAM program. Students in second through fifth grade were invited to attend. We combined fine arts and math and offered science, robotics classes and chess classes. Our arts program is multifaceted so we can make sure our students have an opportunity to explore their gifts and talents. We have a theater arts before and after-school program. Our students have performed the Wizard of Oz, Jungle Book, Cinderella, Aladdin, the Lion King and Peter Pan. We continue to provide our students with music, glee club, violin club, chess club and art classes. At P.S. 254Q, The Rosa Parks School, we exceed expectations! 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ELLs and Students with Disabilities (SWD) are examples of special populations in our school. The ELLs and SWD continue to need help with vocabulary, academic language development and reading comprehension. ELLs need help with listening, speaking, reading and writing. SWD and ELLs need the following: immediate feedback, lessons, questions, and directions scaffolded, frequent checks for understanding, immediate feedback and positive reinforcement. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has made the most progress is: *Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 CEP 11  Over the past year our school made progress in using the Data Wise protocol. We collaboratively looked at student work and made adjustments to our teaching practices in order to have an impact on our students' learning. The educators in our school were keenly aware of whether progress was made or not made due to an instructional gap or learning gap. We also made progress in the quality of our Project Based Learning Units. Teachers worked collaboratively to create units using the Project Design Rubric. The Project Design Rubric has 8 elements. This year we will work on Student Voice and Choice - making certain that students are given opportunities to express voice and choice in the question asked, texts, resources, people to work with, products to be created and use of time. *Strong Family-Community Ties Over the past year educators of the Rosa Parks School have worked tirelessly to provide workshops, family events and information sessions for families of our school. Last year we added a family Saturday STEAM program which included robotics, the fine arts and mathematics, a family chess club, and a monthly family fitness night to the list of programs available for families. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, 96% of our families say that our school promotes family and community involvement. Areas of Focus Our key area of focus will be providing Rigorous Instruction to all students, including our SWD and ELLs. Our needs assessments, goals and action plans clearly describe the strategies that we will focus on, to ensure that Rigorous Instruction is intentionally provided to our students. We strongly believe that focusing on comprehension will lead to improvement in all content areas. The instructional focus will specifically be, monitoring comprehension and questioning. These two strategies go hand in hand. Our goal will be to teach our students how to monitor their own comprehension when reading and writing. We will make certain that the strategies are grade band specific. We will teach them sub-strategies like, making connections, visualizing, inferring, determining importance, summarizing, re-reading and more. We will also continue to build our student's vocabulary. We believe there is a direct relationship between building vocabulary and comprehending text. In mathematics, we will focus on rich math tasks. Selecting a worthwhile problem or task connected to your math goal/objective for the lesson   Giving students time to 'mess around' with the task  Circulating through the classroom and asking questions to help students clarify their thinking or take their thinking to the next level  Making decisions about which students might share their thinking and their work  Pre-selecting students to share their work and engaging the class in math discussions  Summarizing the mathematical learning/draw conclusion We will continue to analyze student work and data and increase student self-assessment. We will share instructional strategies through professional learning communities and implement change strategies. We will follow-up and share whether or not the strategies used were successful. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q254 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 648 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 37 25 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 72.8% % Reduced Lunch 14.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 73.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 55 56 25 93.9% 7.4% 14.4% 3.5% 11.9% 2.3% 2 0% 8.4 49.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At P.S. 254Q, a data-driven approach is used to improve student performance. We use multiple measures to identify and address student needs and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. After reviewing and analyzing the initial results of the 2017 NYS ELA assessment, school benchmark tests, end of unit tests, classroom performance tasks, and Fountas & Pinnell we found our students have been making progress in ELA. Our students met last year's goal of moving 2 reading levels on Fountas and Pinnell end of year assessment. The results from Fountas and Pinnell indicates that in the beginning of the school year 52 % of students across the grades began the year on or above reading level. By the end of the school year, this number increased to 64% of students scoring on or above reading levels. These numbers indicate a 23% increase in Fountas and Pinnell levels across the grades. However, after analyzing the data from the comprehension portion of Fountas and Pinnell and the June Instructional Reports, we realized that there is a need to focus on teaching our students the skills and strategies needed to comprehend texts across all content areas. According to the June 2016 and 2017 Instructional Report, the 3rd and 4th grade students decreased in percentage points in the skills - main idea and word meaning. - On the ELA in 2016, the 3rd grade scored 76%, and in 2017 they scored 77% on main idea questions, showing a slight increase in this area - In 2016 for questions about word meaning, the 3rd grade scored 37%, while in 2017 they scored 64% showing some growth in this area 2018-19 CEP 14  - For questions about the central message, the 3rd graders scored 78% in 2016, and in 2017 scored 62% showing a decrease in this area - In 2016 the 4th grade students scored 58% and in 2017 scored 46% in questions about the main idea, showing a decrease - 2016 students scored at 65% and in 2017 scored at 59% showing decrease in word meaning for informational text - In 2016 4th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 60% in questions about determining theme showing a decrease in this area. We also examined the data for the 5th grade in the following areas, main idea, word meaning (informational) and theme and found the following: - For main idea questions, in 2016 5th graders scored 80% and in 2017 scored 57%, showing a decrease - In 2016, questions about word meaning was 60%, and in 2017 scored 63%, showing increase - In 2016, for questions about the theme 5th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 62% showing a decrease Needs:  There is a need to improve student comprehension by focusing on comprehension skills and strategies  There is a need to improve student comprehension through exposing students to a wide range of vocabulary in all content areas and strategies to figure out word meaning  Teachers and students need to be aware of and monitor the five comprehension sub-processes: Intergrative processes - Readers infer connections and relationships o Microprocesses - Readers chunking ideas and phrases o o Macroprocesses - Readers organize and summarize ideas as they read o Elaborative processes - Readers elaborate on the author's message as they make connections o Metacognitive processes - Readers monitor their comprehension and use problem-solving strategies to read and write effectively 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 10% of students in grades 3-5 will test on or above level in the comprehension portion of the i-Ready ELA Diagnostic test which will be administered at the beginning, middle and end of the year. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our Professional Learning Community will focus on Danielson 3b - questioning and discussion techniques and comprehension strategies. All teachers; all students K-5 including ELLs and SWD September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and all pedagogical staff  Teachers will research and engage in professional learning centered on the five comprehension sub processes  Teachers will research and engage in professional learning centered on comprehension skills and strategies  The Literacy committee will focus on the needs of students and teachers regarding all matters of comprehension  Teachers will participate in inter-visitations to view colleagues delivering lessons focused on comprehension  Teachers will share comprehension strategies at Teacher Team Meetings (TTMs)  Vocabulary Development - Word of the Week  Teachers will utilize the researched based instructional program Teachers College Reading and Writing Project and Text Based Conversation and GoMath's Higher Order Thinking questions to engage students in conversation and metacognition  Teachers will utilize Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DOK) levels and Bloom's Taxonomy Levels to create questions that will scaffold comprehension, and engage students in high level discourse Daily Once a month Daily Daily/ Weekly 2018-19 CEP 17  Daily Daily Weekly Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups are:  AIS small group instruction, before and after school programs for level 1 and 2 students, push-in/pull-out SETSS, and ENL program conducted by certified SETSS and ENL teachers to address comprehension and vocabulary development.  The use of push-in at-risk teachers will lower the teacher-student ration, and will be used to develop student literacy/math comprehension skills and strategies as well as vocabulary development in small groups.  A Special Education IEP teacher will be assigned to support the special education student and staff needs, including: professional development, IEP mandates and adaptive strategies, best approach methodologies, data analysis, comprehensive need assessment, and program design.  Students placed in an ENL program will receive instruction in English using intensive ESL (English as a SWD students, ELLs, Level 1 & 2, September 2018 to June 2019 and lowest Third students Principal, Assistant Principals, AIS teachers, ENL teachers, IEP, and SETSS teacher Daily/ Weekly As needed 2018-19 CEP 18  Second Language) methodologies to address comprehension and vocabulary development. Strategies to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home:  Parent Book of the Month workshops - topics include, but are not limited to: comprehension strategies, higher order thinking questions, questions parents can ask at home and engage their children in discussion, extension activities, book lists and multimedia links - comprehension through art  Parent Association Meetings School Leadership Meetings   Pre-K Learning Through Play Workshops  ELA, Mathematics, Science, and New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test, test preparation workshops  Common Core Learning Standards Workshops  ENL parent workshops - to communicate whenever feasible, with non-English speaking parents in their home language to support shared parent-school accountability, and parents' capacity to improve their children's achievement  Quarterly Readers Are Leaders 100 Book Challenge Pep Rallies As needed Daily/ As needed September 2018 to June 2019 Parents, teachers, students, administrators Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Test Coordinator Monthly Monthly 2x a year 2018-19 CEP 19  Monthly/ As needed 4x yearly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, from September 2018 to June 2019, we will invite families to activities and use online resources to help parents understand our instructional focus comprehension, and how it relates to rigorous instruction. These workshops will take place during the day time and evening or after school. Some of the activities will include: -Workshop on the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) - key personnel responsible: Testing Team and Administration -Workshop on testing - key personnel: Testing Team and Administration -Read Aloud Day using books aligned to Common Core standards - key personnel: all pedagogical staff; -Parents As Reading Partners in (PARP) - to help parents and caregivers with children's math at home. Key personnel: Universal Reading Coach and Administration -Book of the Month with a focus on comprehension- to help parents and caregivers with children's reading at home. Parent Book of the Month workshops topics include, but are not limited to: comprehension strategies, higher order thinking questions, questions parents can ask at home and engage their children in discussion, extension activities, book lists and multimedia links - comprehension through art. Key personnel: Administration and Teachers -Workshop on i-Ready - Key personnel: CS4ALL Team and Administration -Math Family Hour - Math workshops on relevant math topics to help parents and caregivers with children's math at home. Key personnel: Administration and Art Teacher These activities will take place on a weekly, monthly and on an as needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will use include: Per Deim - Substitutes to support Math and Teachers College Reading and Writing professional development in or out of school building Per Session - before or after school curriculum planning and development and PBL curriculum planning - Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator, ELL teachers, SETSS teacher, Literacy Team, Professional Learning Team, Guidance counselor - Trade Books, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Science Fusion, Go! Math, and Teacher's College (TC) Reading and Writing Project - Units of Study - i-Ready Diagnostic - Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, writing benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. - Fountas and Pinnell Teaching for Comprehension and Fluency; NYC Professional Learning Series Word Work and Word Play "A Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction in K-12 Classrooms"; Super 6 Comprehension Strategies; and Strategies That Work - Technological support and Internet based programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will have 3 progress monitoring periods By February 2019 5% of students in grades 3-5 will test on or above level in the comprehension portion of the i-Ready ELA Middle of the Year Diagnostic test as compared to the Beginning of the Year Diagnostic test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use i-Ready as a progress monitoring tool for students in grades 3-5. We will have 3 progress monitoring periods. We will compare the beginning of the year (BOY) results to the middle of the year (MOY) to measure progress toward meeting our goal at the end of the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: P.S. 254Q - The Rosa Parks School provides a supportive environment for all of our students. We use and support our students with the following processes, practices, and activities, such as: Stay Green for Good Behavior  The Leader in Me   Book of the Month – Character Education and Comp    Golden Spoon Challenge - Cafeteria Student of the Month Leader of the Month According to the School 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot, regarding supportive environment overall, 100% of teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room and cafeteria compared to the city's average of 94%. Also, 97% of teachers stated that students feel it is important to come to school every day. Overall 96% of survey respondents indicated that our school has established a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow and supported to meet high expectations. On the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, we have a 91% positive rating for classroom behavior, and received well developed for communicating high expectations to students and staff. In addition, the guide also indicated that 93% of our teachers think that a lot or all of the adults in our school recognize disruptive behavior as social emotional opportunities. Another strength which was exhibited on the survey was the 96% overall positive measure on safety. We also noted that 85% of teachers strongly agreed that discipline is applied to students fairly in our school. Needs: In 2016-2017 we became a Magnet School for Leadership Development and the Arts. To meet the social and emotional needs of our students in September of 2017 we launched The Leader in Me for all constituents in our school community. We believe that the Leader in Me philosophy will help us structure the magnet theme inside and outside the classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 23  In June of 2017 we examined the 2017 Measurable Results Assessment tool from the Leader in Me and the following information was revealed: 84% of the staff provided social and emotional learning support to their students; 71% of students take responsibility for their actions, set goals, and persist even when things are difficult. 76% of students are committed to working hard to achieve their goals and persist even when things are difficult. Our intention is to increase our students' leadership skills, responsibility, accountability, initiative, goal setting and the ability to work as a team. P.S. 254’s vision is to create a learning environment in which all members of our community are dedicated to providing a quality education which focuses on growth in all areas of students’ development including, social-emotional, academic, gifts and talents. We believe that all students can be leaders if empowered with the skills and knowledge to manage their lives emotionally and academically. Our goal is to create lifelong learners, critical thinkers and fair-minded citizens who respect diversity while acting with integrity towards their own principles and values. The policies, practices, and structures our school has in place to support the whole child are:  The Leader in Me Lighthouse Teams will meet monthly to discuss, plan and evaluate current activities and practices.  Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Team and Professional Development Team will focus on the 7 Habits of Healthy Kids.  SEL Team will participate in outside professional development on SEL concepts.  Book of the Month – Character Education: promotes the habits of Leader in Me, e.g., being proactive, begin with the end in mind, think win-win, etc.; as well as foster self-esteem, perseverance, respect, etc.  Stay Green for Good Behavior: promotes good decision-making skills.  Golden Spoon Challenge: encourages positive behavior and self-esteem.  Tip-Top Tuesday: students that exhibit an understanding of good citizenship are chosen weekly from each class  Respect for All Week: students gain a better understanding of getting along with others. 2018-19 CEP 24   Kindness Week: students intentionally practice kind actions toward others in their school community.  Unity Day: the school community come together to promote kindness and acceptance.  Food & Clothing Drive: promotes student understanding of the importance of giving and helping others within the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all of our classroom teachers will implement The Leader in Me program to strengthen positive interactions amongst our students which will result in improved behavioral and academic outcomes in our students, as measured by a 5% increase on our students’ end of year Measurable Results Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The following is a list of research based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: All PreK – 5, ELLs, SWD, teachers, and administrators  90% of the staff will attend the initial 7 Habits of Highly Effective People professional development.  Lighthouse Team will be developed with a member from each grade and specialty/para professionals, teachers represented.  The professional development team will provide professional development focusing on the books: "The 7 Habits of Happy Kids", the Leader in Me and 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.  Teachers will carefully teach the students the required steps needed to achieve their personal learning goals.  Students will be taught strategies to self-assess, make September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff 2018-19 CEP 26  decisions, and take a leadership role in classroom discussions.  Students will be taught how to use rubrics to assess their learning.  Teachers will implement Student Led Conferences for Parent Teacher Conferences.  The Lighthouse committee will facilitate Leader in Me special schoolwide assemblies led by students Strategies will be used to address the needs of our ELLs, SWD and other high-need subgroups: November 2018 and March 2019 3x yearly 3x yearly September 2018 to June 2019 AIS providers will be used to lower the teacher- student ratio, and will be used to develop students’ to assess their own learning ● ELL teachers will use standalone/integrated models All PreK – 5, ELLs, SWD ● Students will be engaged in many group activities and a strong literacy and language program which are directly related to all curriculum areas. ● All ELLs and SWD will be encouraged to attend before and after school programs to develop language skills that assist them and help them to function effectively in their regular classrooms. ● Students will participate in literacy-based programs that have been established as part of the overall instructional program. Daily Daily January 2019 to May 2019 Daily Daily Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff 2018-19 CEP 27  ● ELL teachers will service all ELLs as required under CR Part 154 regulations and guidelines. ● Teachers will provide opportunities for ELLs and SWDs to communicate effectively ● Teachers will model discussions through the use of think alouds Family Support All teachers, parents, students, PreK-5. The staff will provide workshops for:  The Leader in Me  CookShop for Families  Book of the Month Family Fun Night   Math Workshops  Testing Workshops Various communication tools will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school week. It will be in a form that families find understandable and useful.  parent orientation,  phone calls,  parent conferences,   curriculum night, school website (P.S. 254's own website, Twitter, Facebook etc.),  Monthly school calendar,  Parent Teacher Conferences and  Open School Week Parents will be encouraged to attend PA meetings that will be held at times that are convenient for parents. A rotational schedule of PA meetings will be developed in coordination with the PA executives and the school in order to accommodate parents that cannot Weekly Weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff, Language Access Coordinator, Parent Coordinator September 2018 to June 2019 Monthly Ongoing Monthly 2018-19 CEP 28  attend evening meetings only. When necessary, translators will be available, so those parents will understand all of the proceedings at PA meetings. Additional accommodations will be made for parents with disabilities so that they too, can attend meetings. N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018, March 2019 Monthly N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. To engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment: The school will reach out to provide parents with information about "The Leader in Me" program and student progress. The information provided will include workshops, parent orientation, phone calls, parent conferences, curriculum night, the school's own website, etc. Communication will be in a form that families find understandable and useful. The key personnel needed for this are the administrators, teachers, Parent Coordinator, and Language Access Coordinator. With the guidance and support of the school, family members can assist their children with homework and other school related projects, and activities. Our school will encourage parents to join in learning activities at home (library cards, home reading corner, Parent Association (PA) resource centers, book sales, following directions, reading recipes, poetry reading and writing, etc.). This will be on a weekly, and ongoing basis throughout the school year. The guidance counselor, Math Committee, Lighthouse Committee and administration will provide workshops several times, at least once per month, during the school year. The key personnel needed for this are the administrators, teachers, Parent Coordinator. Parents will be encouraged to attend and participate in Title I Parent meetings. School publications (e.g., pamphlets, school calendar, newsletters, letters to parents and school website) will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school week. The key personnel needed for this are the administrators, teachers, Parent Coordinator, and Language Access Coordinator. These activities will take place on a weekly, monthly and on an as needed basis. Parents will be encouraged to attend PA monthly meetings that will be held at times that are convenient for parents. When necessary, translators will be available, so those parents will understand all of the proceedings at PA meetings. Additional accommodations will be made for parents with disabilities so that they too, can attend meetings. Key personnel needed for this area are: administrators, teachers, parent coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 29  The resources we will use include: - Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator, ELL teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, Educational Assistants, Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, School Aides - The Leader in Me, The 7 Habits of Happy Kids and 7 Habits of Highly Effective People - Sanford Harmony - Technological support and Internet based programs Per Diem - Substitutes to support Leader in Me training and District or Citywide SEL training Per Session - before or after school curriculum planning and event planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019 there will be a 2.5% increase in Leader in Me mid-year Measurable Results Assessment student survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be a student survey that will be given in the beginning and middle of the year that mimics the formal end of year Measurable Results Assessment Student Survey. The results of the EOY survey will be compared to the BOY survey. On-going progress will be monitored by administrators through observations, looking at student work and lesson plans. Formal and Informal observations will show an increase in high levels of student led participation in conferences across all content areas, effective use of student responses and ideas and enthusiastic student led discussions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, the Collaborative Teachers Framework has shown a steady increase over the past three years. In 2015 we ranked 4.48, 2016 we ranked 4.54, and 2017 we ranked 4.71. This area ranked the second highest on the report. On this same survey, the question "How well do teachers work with each other?" (Indicator 4.2) received a well-developed rating. In addition, all teachers agree that their professional development opportunities with other colleagues have been extremely productive. These two areas have shown an increase from the 2015-2016 School Quality report. It is reported that increased effective collaboration improves teacher performance, as it exposes teachers to improved practices, which leads to stronger pedagogy. This will eventually, lead to more benefits for the student. The findings from the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicated that: - School Commitment ranked 100% positive - Peer Collaboration also ranked 100% positive In these two areas the teachers show that the school is a positive place to work, that they would recommend the school to parents/guardians, that they work together to design instructional programs together, and that the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. An Area of Celebration, on the Principal Performance Observation (PPO) written feedback, stated that administrators and teachers have built a culture of professional collaborations in which they share insights relative to the coherence of teacher pedagogy, which fosters improved outcomes for all learners. In addition, teacher teams use a data-driven approach in their analysis of student work, which helps them to adjust their teaching practices as needed and create specific goals for groups of students. Needs: In order to forge our vision of becoming a Project Based Learning (PBL) school, with the help of our Magnet Coordinator, our teachers attended the Buck Institute PBL 101 training. At this training, teachers learned how to create projects that were inquiry based, rigorous, CCLS aligned and real-world applicable. To create well designed 2018-19 CEP 31  projects teachers must work collaboratively. The project must have the following Essential Project Design Elements: a challenging problem or question, must be able to sustain inquiry, must be authentic, must allow students to have choice, must allow students to reflect and critique and revise and must have a time to present (Buck Institute 2015). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all grade teams of teachers will participate in professional development, which will lead to the design of 3 Project Based Units, that will expose all students to projects that are rigorous, real world applicable and student led. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change and promote effective student led conferences: All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff  All teachers will participate in PBL professional development  All teacher teams will work collaboratively to create 3 PBL units  The Magnet Resource teacher will work with the Teacher Leader and teacher team to design PBL units  Teacher Teams will work collaboratively with cluster teachers, ENL teachers and SPED team to create PBL units  Teacher Leaders will meet with the Vertical Team to share PBL ideas  During professional learning communities teachers will identify areas in need of improvement and work to strengthen professional growth and improve classroom instructional practices in tangent with the school's instructional focus of comprehension.  Danielson's Framework for Teaching will focus on 3b, using questioning and discussion techniques, 3c, engaging students in learning and 3d, using assessment, including self-assessment, in instruction. Ongoing Ongoing Weekly Weekly 2018-19 CEP 33  All teachers. All students, K-5 including ELLS and SWD Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: ● RTI/AIS small group instruction, before & after school programs, push-in/pull-out Special Education Teacher Support Services, at risk Speech and Language services and ELL program are conducted by certified SETSS, Speech Therapists and ELL teachers ● A Special Education IEP teacher will be assigned to support the Special Education students and staff needs, including: analyzing data, providing professional development, servicing IEP mandated students, adapting curriculum to meet the students’ needs by using a multi-sensory approach and incorporating strategies for the CCLS to be achieved. ● Students placed in an ELL Program will receive instruction in English using intensive ESL methodologies. The ELL teachers will collaborate with the classroom teachers to make certain ESL methodologies are being used consistently. September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff Daily Weekly Strategies to increase teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement include: ● Parent outreach on Mondays and Tuesdays ● Open School Week ● Prepare for the Future Night ● Monthly SLT meetings ● eChalk computer program to foster communication All teachers. All parents of students, PreK-5 Daily September 2018 to June 2019 Weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator Monthly 2018-19 CEP 34  between the teacher and the home ● Pre-K Learning Through Play workshops ● ELA, Mathematics, New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), and Science Test Prep workshop; Book of the Month - theme based; CookShop in the Classroom - use of parent volunteers; Family Fun Night and Family Fitness Night - parents, teachers and students work together to complete various activities Weekly Weekly N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies through: - Parent Outreach on Mondays and Tuesdays - key personnel are administrators, pedagogical staff, parent coordinator; - Open School Week; prepare for the Future Night; monthly SLT meetings; P.S. 254's own school website - computer program to foster communication between the teacher and the home; Pre-K Learning Through Play workshops; ELA, Mathematics, New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), and Science Test Prep workshop - key personnel responsible are administrators and testing team; - Book of the Month - theme based - key personnel responsible are administrators, art teacher and teachers; - CookShop in the Classroom - use of parent volunteers - key personnel responsible are: CookShop Coordinator, Parent Coordinator; - Family Fun Night / Family Fitness Night- parents, teachers and students work together to complete various activities which will be conducted once a month- key personnel responsible are parent coordinator, teachers; - CookShop for Families - key personnel responsible are: CookShop for Families leaders. These activities will take place on a weekly, monthly and on an as needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will use include: 2018-19 CEP 35  · Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor · ReadyGen, NYCDOE Passport to Social Studies, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies NYC, NYC Social Studies Trade Books, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Science Fusion, Go! Math, and Teacher's College (TC) Writing Project - Units of Study · Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, writing benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. · Technological support and Internet based programs Per Session - before or after school curriculum planning and development and PBL curriculum planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 all grade teams of teachers will participate in professional development, which will lead to the design of one Project Based Unit, containing all 8 design elements. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrators will monitor progress by using the Essential Project Design Rubric to ensure that the following 8 key elements are included in the unit: Key knowledge, understanding and success skills; a challenging problem/question; sustained inquiry; authenticity; student voice and choice; student reflection; critique and revision; and a public product. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths At P.S. 254Q, a data-driven approach is used to improve student performance. We use multiple measures to identify and address student needs and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. After reviewing and analyzing the initial results of the 2017 NYS ELA assessment, school benchmark tests, end of unit tests, classroom performance tasks, and Fountas & Pinnell we found our students have been making progress in ELA. Our students met last year's goal of moving 2 reading levels on Fountas and Pinnell end of year assessment. Data According to the June 2016 and 2017 Instructional Report, the 3rd and 4th grade students decreased in percentage points in the skills - main idea and word meaning. - On the ELA in 2016, the 3rd grade scored 76%, and in 2017 they scored 77% on main idea questions, showing a slight increase in this area - In 2016 for questions about word meaning, the 3rd grade scored 37%, while in 2017 they scored 64% showing some growth in this area - For questions about the central message, the 3rd graders scored 78% in 2016, and in 2017 scored 62% showing a decrease in this area - In 2016 the 4th grade students scored 58% and in 2017 scored 46% in questions about the main idea, showing a decrease - 2016 students scored at 65% and in 2017 scored at 59% showing decrease is in word meaning for informational text 2018-19 CEP 37  - In 2016 4th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 60% in questions about determining theme showing a decrease in this area. We also examined the data for the 5th grade in the following areas, main idea, word meaning (informational) and theme and found the following: - For main idea questions, in 2016 5th graders scored 80% and in 2017 scored 57%, showing a decrease - In 2016, questions about word meaning was 60%, and in 2017 scored 63%, showing increase - In 2016, for questions about the theme 5th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 62% showing a decrease Needs: After analyzing the data from the comprehension portion of Fountas and Pinnell and the June Instructional Reports, we realized that there is a need to focus on teaching our students the skills and strategies needed to comprehend texts across all content areas. In addition, there is a need to continue to provide professional learning for our teachers with a focus on:    creating questions that increase student comprehension and mastery of content goals. improving student understanding by focusing on comprehension skills and strategies improving student comprehension through exposing students to a wide range of vocabulary in all content areas and strategies to figure out word meaning  Teachers and students becoming Knowledgeable of and monitoring the five comprehension sub-processes: Intergrative processes - Readers infer connections and relationships o Microprocesses - Readers chunking ideas and phrases o o Macroprocesses - Readers organize and summarize ideas as they read o Elaborative processes - Readers elaborate on the author's message as they make connections o Metacognitive processes - Readers monitor their comprehension and use problem-solving strategies to read and write effectively Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 38  By June 2019, leadership will ensure professional learning is evident in classroom instruction as measured by a 2% increase in Highly Effective observations for domain 3b. We will focus on comprehension through questioning. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Research-based instructional programs , professional development: ● Administration will lead by example by conducting 25 All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff horizontal or vertical teacher team meetings.Administration will lead by example by conducting teacher team meetings or vertical team meetings about comprehension and questioning. ● Principal will develop and empower Team Leaders to ensure the vision of the administration is communicated to the staff and lead professional development ● Principal will empower teachers to make data-driven decisions about how to best instruct their students ● Administration will organize teachers around the learning of a select group of students for whom they share responsibility ● Administration will make certain teachers focus on aligning assessment, curriculum, instruction, and professional development to generate school-wide improvement Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: ● AIS & RtI small group instruction, before & after school programs for Level 1 and 2 students, push-in/pull-out SETSS, Weekly Ongoing All students, including ELLs and SWD September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff Weekly 2018-19 CEP 40  and ENL program conducted by certified SETSS and ELL teachers ● A Special Education IEP teacher will be assigned to lead and support the Special Education student and staff needs including: professional development, IEP mandates adaptive strategies, best approach methodology, data analysis, comprehensive needs assessment, and program design. ● The ENL teacher will lead PD in using ESL methodologies. The teacher will be assigned to support staff and ensure students placed in an ELL (English Language Learner) Program will receive instruction in English using intensive ESL methodologies. Daily Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement as a key lever for school improvement : ● School Leadership Team (SLT) ● Parent Association (PA) ● Coffee and Conversation with the Principal Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator All teachers. All parents of students, Pre-K-5 Monthly September2018 to June 2019 Monthly Bi-monthly ● P.S. 254 own school website to foster communication Monthly ● School publications (i.e. pamphlets, school calendar, newsletters and letters to parents) will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school ● Open School Week ● Pre-K and Kindergarten Orientations ● Pre-K Learning Through Play Workshops ● ELA, Mathematics, NYSESLAT and Science Test Prep workshops Yearly 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ENL parent workshops - To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent- school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement Monthly N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies we will conduct the following activities:  School Leadership Team (SLT) – key personnel includes administration, parent association, and various pedagogical staff representatives;  Parent Association (PA) – key personnel include parent representatives, parent coordinator, administration, teachers;  Coffee and Conversation with the Principal – key personnel include administration, various pedagogical staff;  P.S. 254's own school website to foster communication – key personnel include pedagogical staff, administration; school publications (i.e. pamphlets, school calendar, newsletters and letters to parents) – key personnel needed are administration, teachers, parent coordinator;  Open School Week – administration, pedagogical staff; Pre-K and Kindergarten Orientations – pedagogical staff, administration;  Pre-K Learning Through Play Workshops – administration, pedagogical staff;  ELA, Mathematics, NYSESLAT and Science Test Prep workshops – administration and testing team;  ENL parent workshops - to communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement – key personnel include ENL teachers, parent coordinator, administration.  These activities will take place on a weekly, monthly and on an as needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will use include: ·-Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor - Literacy for the 21 Century 2018-19 CEP 42  - Strategies That Work - Teaching for Comprehension and Fluency - Super 6 - The Reading Strategies Book · Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, writing benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. - i-Ready - Technological support and Internet based programs Per Session - before or after school PBL curriculum planning and school curriculum unit planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leadership would have led at least 12 Vertical Team meetings focusing on comprehension through questioning, domain 3b, as measured by sign-in sheets and agendas. There will be a 1% increase in Highly Effective ratings for domain 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. On-going progress will be monitored by administrators through observations, looking at student work, Vertical Team Meeting and/or horizontal agendas and lesson plans. Formal and Informal observations will show an increase in high levels of student participation, effective use of student responses and ideas, enthusiastic student discussions, tasks that are challenging, etc. Administrators will norm their advance ratings to ascertain teachers progress in domain 3b. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, our school provided a variety of family engagement workshops and events. We offered fifty-one (51) parent/family workshops; three (3) parent information sessions for students going to middle school, and twelve (12) school-wide family events. We realize that parents play an irreplaceable role in a child's life. Studies indicate that the relationship between parent and child is one that impacts a child throughout his or her life. In addition, the benefits of parental involvement benefits numerous areas in a child's life, including but not limited to health and development, and academic progress. When the most important adults in a child's life work together, students benefit enormously. To this end, we will continue to support the parent-child relationship, and we will continue to offer various and frequent parent/family engagement activities. Of the fifty-one workshops completed, the average attendance was 30 attendees. For the parent information session and positive behavior workshop, there were 12 attendees respectively. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, we were rated well-developed in our role of effectively partnering with families to support student success. The Guide shows a percentage of 97% and a score of 4.00 in the area of Outreach to Parents. We are showing that we are effectively reaching out to parents by: informing them continuously about how their child learns (95%); by communicating in a language they can understand (98%); and that teachers work closely with them to meet their child’s needs (97%). Parents showed strong agreement on the survey in the area of outreach. However, in the area of Parent Involvement in School, the Guide shows a percentage of 91%, and a score of 3.25 in this area. For one of the questions, in the area of Parent Involvement in School, only 73% of parents responded that they have been asked to volunteer time to support their school. In this area, 96% of parents responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. We will continue to improve in this area and invite more parents to be school/class volunteers. There is still a need to continue to increase parent involvement. We will continue to offer various workshops for parents to continue to participate in their child's educational process, improve their child's overall academic performance and gain valuable insight as to how school policies work. Some of the workshops we will offer will be in collaboration with the PA, the parent coordinator and the guidance counselor. These workshops will include topics such as: The Path to Citizenship; How Learning English Benefits Your Child; Information Session for your Middle School Child; Positive Behavior/Discipline; Empowering Parents to Help their ELL Achieve; Getting Involved with Your Child's Learning; Behavioral Modification, Coping with Stress, and other topics to benefit parents and address their needs. 2018-19 CEP 44  There is a continued need to maintain and promote a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students that is understood and supported by the entire school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in parent participation at scheduled parent and school meetings as measured by sign-in sheets, outreach logs and feedback from parent surveys. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Teachers, Parents of all students PreK-5 September 2018 to June 2019 ● All members of our school community will attend workshops to learn and practice Leader in Me precepts (7 Habits) ● All parents and teachers will be invited to attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings, such as, PA, SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, Title I Parent committee ● All parents will attend parent/teacher conferences 4 times a year ● P.S. 254's own school website is used to foster communication between home and school ● Encourage feedback from: monthly parent meetings, P.S. 254 own website and teacher and parent School Survey ● School trips to museums and other cultural institutions are planned throughout the year in which parents are invited to chaperon ● Community events aid our success in all areas. Our annual Community Read Aloud provides parents, community members, staff, and students with an opportunity to share a piece of literature and have a meaning discussion. This special day promotes parent involvement with a special emphasis on literacy ● During our Career Day, parents and community members share their careers with students, including the education needed, training, etc. 4-5x yearly Monthly/ As needed 4x yearly Weekly / Monthly Ongoing 2018-19 CEP 46  Once a year Once a year Principal, Assistant Principals, Team leaders, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: Teachers, Parents of all students K-5 September 2018 to June 2019 ● Parent Coordinator and parent volunteer(s) conducts monthly ENL workshops to help families develop the English language in order to increase parent participation in their child's academics ● Ongoing workshops to support parents in understanding IEP’s, share adaptive strategies that can be used at home, help families understand their children’s development and how to support the changes children undergo, etc. ● The school will help parents gain access to support services by other agencies, such as health care, Supplemental Educational Services (SES), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) programs and other childcare programs. Monthly As needed Strategies to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes: ● Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops on various topics As needed September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Parents of all students PreK-5 Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, all pedagogical staff, Language Coordinator, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 47  ● Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents ● Parent outreach on Mondays from 7:50-8:30 ● PA meetings ● Monthly Book of the Month Parent Workshops ● eChalk computer program to foster communication between the teacher and the home ● Monthly Family Fun Night events for parents and students Weekly Monthly ● Cookshop for Families - nutrition workshops for parents Monthly ● Pre-K Learning Through Play workshops ● ELA, Mathematics, NYSESLAT and Science Test Prep workshops ● Open School Week - during November ● Prepare for the Future Night - once a year ● Monthly School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings Yearly ● Family Movie Night ● Coffee and Conversation with the Principal ● Art Workshops ● Technology Workshops ● ELL Parent Workshops ● Character education program ● Pre-K and Kindergarten Orientations ● School publications (e.g, pamphlets, monthly calendar, newsletters and letters to parents) will be used to apprise parents of the important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school. ● To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve Monthly 2018-19 CEP 48  their children’s achievement. ● Leader in Me program Daily/As Needed N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We use The River Fund, which assists parents and families with various services, such as, food stamps, health insurance, immigration, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will use include: · Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent Coordinator, ELL teacher, Guidance counselor, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project NYCDOE Passport to Social Studies, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies NYC, NYC Social Studies, Trade books, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Science Fusion, and Go! Math · Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, writing benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. · Technological support and Internet based programs 2018-19 CEP 49  Per Session - before or after school event planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 1.5% increase in parent participation at events held for parents as measured by sign-in sheets, outreach logs and feedback from parent surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure and assess our progress by using attendance logs at workshops and events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell individual student assessment; NYS ELA-students scoring level 1 and 2; ReadyGen assessments; and teacher observation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, and before or after school programs. Response to Intervention (RtI) Small group and one-to-one delivery. -Direct Instruction; guided instruction, modeling, based on academic need -Reading with TLC Using a push-in/pull-out model, the ELL teachers,IEPand SETSS teachers will reduce the student to teacher ratio -Scaffolding -Use of Multiple Intelligences Materials used include: - Pearson ReadyGEN - ReadyGen Scaffolding Strategies Handbook - Ready New York CCLS Instruction ELA -Imagine Learning English for ELLs 2018-19 CEP 51  Mathematics Students scoring level 1 and 2 on NYS MATH Assessment; Go Math! assessments; and teacher observation Science Academic Intervention Support in the area of science will be provided to those students who are at-risk of not meeting the state standards. -Teacher Created Materials: Focused Reading Intervention Direct Instruction; guided instruction, modeling -Scaffolding -Use of multiple intelligences -Use of manipulatives Materials used include: -Ready New York CCLS Instruction MATH; Brainpop, Go! Math -Teacher Created Materials: Focused Mathematics Use of multiple intelligences -Scaffolding During the school day, and before or after school programs. Small group and one-to-one delivery. Using a push-in/pull-out model, the ELL teachers,IEPandSETSS teachers will reduce the student to teacher ratio Small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. During the school day. -Direct Instruction; guided instruction, Based on teacher observation / data modeling The ELL teachers, IEP andSETSS teachers will reduce the student to teacher ratio 2018-19 CEP 52  Social Studies Academic Intervention support in the area of social studies will be provided to those students who are at-risk of not meeting the state standards. Criteria based on teacher observation /data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria used are: psychological report, teacher observation / data, parent referral Materials used include: -Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Science Fusion -Use of Multiple intelligences -Scaffolding Small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. During the school day. -Direct Instruction; guided instruction, The ELL teachers,IEPand SETSSteachers will reduce the student to teacher ratio Small group and one-to-one delivery. During the school day. modeling Materials used include: -Core Curriculum non-fiction trade books Counseling programs: Topics and groups covered by counselor include, but are not limited to: -Bereavement Groups -Dealing with Divorce -Improving Decision- Making Skills/ Problem Solving 2018-19 CEP 53  Skills -Anger Management 2018-19 CEP 54  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have one student in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide Title I services, which includes free meals, immediate enrollment, transportation, free uniforms and bookbags, and any other school supplies to alleviate the financial burden on the student and their family. Once the parents make us aware of the temporary living conditions, we will make every effort to provide outreach to the family through either the guidance counselor, parent coordinator, teacher, or administration. We deem outreach as essential as it allows us to address the students' basic and academic needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 55  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 56  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● All teachers at P.S. 254Q - The Rosa Parks School are appropriately certified and highly qualified. ● We will offer ongoing professional development to increase teachers’ skills in methodologies to improve student behavior and sound pedagogical techniques in teaching students with disabilities. ● Our professional development (PD) will be based upon data-driven student needs and geared towards sound research validated practices. The PD sessions will be matched to curriculum content and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. ● Our school retains and develops highly qualified teachers by guiding their work through collaboration with the teachers on their grade, PD, and assistance from administration. ● We will adapt a plan similar to the state of Illinois’ “Grow Your Own Teachers” initiative, whereby paraprofessionals already in the classroom are encouraged to become fully qualified teachers by informing them of financial assistance available to complete certification requirements. Additionally, paraprofessionals are encouraged to apply to New York State Education Department fully online degree program leading to initial teacher certification. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 57  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The high quality professional development at P.S. 254 - The Rosa Parks School, focuses on what teachers are expected to teach and students are expected to learn based on the Common Core State Standards. The PD activities provided will focus on specific strategies that research and experience have proven to be effective in increasing student learning and achievement. The modules and other suggestions on Engage NY for utilizing CCSS is an example of how educators will engage in high quality PD. The PD is connected to what ELL, SWD and general education students should know and how students can best learn that content. Professional development is ongoing and embedded in the daily work of all educators at our school. All educators are involved in planning, implementing, reflecting, and evaluating the process. A schedule of the year’s PD activities has been established. Also, resources are allocated to ensure that when new skills are learned, they will be able to be implemented. Throughout the school year, the resources allocated will include: internal and external expertise to support our educators. In addition, print (professional journals, books), electronic, and other material resources will be available to support the professional learning in our community. The educators will collaborate and continue to take an active role in analyzing data, researching best practices, implementing and employing what they have learned and sharing the results. At weekly teacher team meetings (TTMs) staff members will lead discussions on ways to improve teaching and learning. They will look at student work to analyze its contents. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The plan used to transition our students from preschool classes to early childhood classes include: designing PD activities for preschool and kindergarten teachers in order to align pre-kindergarten and kindergarten curricula and goals. Inter-class visitations – kindergarten and preschool teachers visit each other’s classrooms. Preschool teachers will share written records and portfolios of children’s work with future kindergarten teachers. 2018-19 CEP 58  This plan also includes steps that will be followed if a child is having difficulty with language or cognitive skills. In either case, the preschool teacher will provide the kindergarten teacher with the child’s history and documentation of steps taken to help the child progress toward his or her program goal, and a discussion of areas where the child is still experiencing difficulty. Involvement of Parents in Transition: ● Parent workshops will be provided by social workers to show parents how to help their child make adjustments into school and any other information needed about the school their child will be attending. ● School personnel, teachers and principals are invited to attend a parent meeting to discuss the kindergarten program, the role of parents in the school and to answer any other questions. We will also include the parent coordinators to translate the information during the meeting. Other workshops for parents will be provided to discuss developmental needs of their children, and any other social and emotional needs they may need to help their child assimilate into school life and transition into Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will use the work sampling system as a basis for assessing students. The process teachers participate in consists of observations of students during activities. This assessment will take place on an ongoing basis to gain insight into children’s strengths, knowledge, interests and skills. The observations will allow a teacher to get a more accurate picture of students in context of their environment. Asking specific questions will be inherent in the assessment because it will provide a focus for observations and lead to solutions. In addition, portfolios will be used to collect evidence of students’ development. Looking at student work samples enables teachers to measure progress across multiple domains and thus inform curriculum and instruction. Professional development provided will gather samples of student work. The use of a checklist rating will be presented to assess each student sample and discussions will ensue regarding strengths, interests, and areas in need of development. PD will be provided by external experts for teachers to train on the work sampling system. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 CEP 59  Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 287,884.00 Title II, Part A Federal 35,556.00 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 12,366.00 0.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,460,254.00 X X X X Section 5A-Rigorous instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, 5C - Collaborative Teachers, 5D - Effective School Leadership, and 5E-Strong Family and Community Ties Section 5A-Rigorous instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, 5C - Collaborative Teachers, 5D - Effective School Leadership, and 5E-Strong Family and Community Ties Section 5A-Rigorous instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, 5C - Collaborative Teachers, 5D - Effective School Leadership, and 5E-Strong Family and Community Ties Section 5A-Rigorous instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, 5C - Collaborative Teachers, 5D - Effective School Leadership, and 5E-Strong Family and Community Ties 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 60  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 61   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 62  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 254Q -The Rosa Parks School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 254Q - The Rosa Parks School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 63  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade- level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 64  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. New York City Department of Education Public School 254 Queens The Rosa Parks School 84-40 101 Street Richmond Hill, New York 11418 (718) 520-7878 (718) 520-2275 FAX Pamela Markham, Principal 2018-19 CEP 65  Heather Sosnovsky, Assistant Principal Sharon Bherwani, Assistant Principal Statement of Parent Involvement Policy 2018- 2019 PS 254Q - The Rosa Parks School P.S. 254Q - The Rosa Parks School is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school and community. We have identified nine key areas that contribute to a partnership that supports greater student achievement. ● The school will join parents in providing for the health and safety of our children, and in the maintenance of a home environment that encourages learning and positive behavior in schools. The school will provide training and information to help families understand their children’s development and how to support the changes the children undergo. ● The school will reach out to provide parents with information about school programs and student progress. This outreach will take place during workshops, parent conferences, meet the staff night, through phone calls, and the school's own website. Communication will be in a form that families find understandable and useful. ● Parents can make a significant contribution to the environment and functioning of our school. Our school will encourage parent volunteerism and make every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. ● With the guidance and support of the school, family members can assist their children with homework and other school related activities. Our school will encourage parents to join in learning activities at home (e.g., library cards, i-Ready reading and math online program, home reading corner, Parent Association (PA) resource centers, book sales, following directions, reading recipes, etc.) ● The school will help parents gain access to support services by other agencies, such as health care, Supplemental Educational Services (SES), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and childcare programs. ● Parents will be encouraged to attend Parent Association (PA) meetings that will be held at times that are convenient for parents. When necessary, translators will be available, so those parents will understand all of the proceedings at PA meetings. Additional accommodations will be made for parents with disabilities so that they too can attend meetings. ● Through the efforts of the Parent Coordinator (PC), the PA President with DOE support, an outreach will be made to parents of students in temporary housing (STH) so that these families will be involved in all parent/school activities. ● School publications (i.e. pamphlets, school calendar, newsletters, and letters to parents) will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events, parent workshops and open school. ● At an Open House, the parents of English Language Learners/Limited English Proficiency (ELL/LEP) students will receive an orientation session on state standards assessment program, school expectations and general program requirements for bilingual education, dual language and free standing ENL programs.  THE PARENT INVOLVEMENT POLICY WILL BE DISTRIBUTED IN THE FALL OF 2018 TO ALL PARENT CAREGIVERS 2018-19 CEP 66  Parent Workshops Monthly workshops for parents are provided by administration, PC, teachers, guidance counselor, and social worker. These sessions will focus on school life for students, curriculum standards, assessments, and health and medical issues for families. Parent Workshops are provided by professionals at monthly PA meetings in areas of health, school curriculum, assessment and other matters pertaining to family social and educational issues. Professional Development is provided for parents on the School Leadership Team (SLT) in order to assist team members in making informed decisions about school matters. ELL Professional Development: Monthly ELL/Bilingual professional development will be made available to all parents of ELLs. Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYS-ELL standards, CR-Part 154, instructional strategies and NYS and NYC assessments given to their children. Parents will be notified of any district-and city-wide workshops. Students with disabilities/Professional Development: Monthly professional development will be made available to all parents of students with disabilities. Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYS standards, instructional strategies and NYS and NYC assessments given to their children. Annual evaluation of the Parent Involvement Policy In June 2018, the school's parent involvement policy will be evaluated for its usefulness in meeting the needs of all parents of students at the school. This evaluation will be coordinated with the executives of the PA and the school's parent coordinator and administration. THE UPDATED VERSION WILL BE DISTRIBUTED IN THE FALL OF 2018 TO ALL PARENTS/CAREGIVERS. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 254Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 2018-19 CEP 67  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 68  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 CEP 69  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 70  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 71  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our goal is for the ELLs in our school to become proficient in the English language, both academically and socially. To this end, we have developed a plan to improve students' reading and language skills to succeed now and in the future. The plan is also designed to help improve their ELA and mathematics scores on the state exams. According to the June 2016 and 2017 Instructional Report, the 3rd and 4th grade students decreased in percentage points in the skills - main idea and word meaning. On the ELA in 2016, the 3rd grade scored 76%, and in 2017 they scored 77% on main idea questions, showing a slight increase in this area. In 2016 for questions about word meaning, the 3rd grade scored 37%, while in 2017 they scored 64% showing some growth in this area. For questions about the central message, the 3rd graders scored 78% in 2016, and in 2017 scored 62% showing a decrease in this area. In 2016 the 4th grade students scored 58% and in 2017 scored 46% in questions about the main idea, showing a decrease. In 2016 4th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 60% in questions about determining theme showing a decrease in this area. We also examined the data for the 5th grade in the following areas, main idea, word meaning (informational) and theme and found the following: For main idea questions, in 2016 5th graders scored 80% and in 2017 scored 57%, showing a decrease. In 2016, questions about word meaning was 60%, and in 2017 they scored 63%, showing an increase in this area. In 2016, for questions about the theme 5th graders scored 71% and in 2017 they scored 62% showing a decrease. Based on this information from the scores in these important areas, we will focus on comprehension through vocabulary development during our afterschool program. On the 2017 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), the modalities that our ELLs showed very little progress on were listening and writing. Some ELLs improved slightly (by a few points) in the writing modality, but most stayed the same or decreased. For the listening modality, slightly more ELLs showed an increase in this area. However, many ELLs showed a decline or stayed the same. Hence, the conclusion that the focus of our afterschool program will be to improve writing and listening skills. These two areas will be addressed by providing many opportunities for ELLs to engage in vocabulary, listening strategies, comprehension strategies and structured writing activities. We need to help our students improve their proficiency in academic English and move to higher levels in ELA, NYSESLAT and mathematics. Although we will provide continual practice in speaking and reading, we will focus on the two modalities, listening and writing, that students consistently struggled with on tests as well as in their class work. To address these needs, we will conduct a targeted after school program for our ELLs beginning in January 2019. This program will be held two times a week — until April 2019. Sessions will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 - 5:00 p.m. This information will be conveyed to parents via letters in their preferred language. The total number of sessions for this program is 25, with two certified ENL teachers and one teacher certified in common branches conducting the sessions. The teachers will collaborate and co-teach during these afterschool sessions. The targeted ELLs are in grades 3 to 5 with proficiency levels of entering (beginner), emerging (low intermediate), and transitioning (high intermediate), who need additional strategies to 2018-19 CEP 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information become proficient. The English Language Learners we will target are the students in general education and in special education--Students with Disabilities (SWDELLs). Approximately 35 students will be targeted based on the data showing they have the greatest need. The program will be conducted in English, and the instructional materials will be geared toward improving content information and building English proficiency skills. The program which will be used for this afterschool program is: Rigby's In-Step Readers, Finish Line New York ELLs (Continental), Imagine Learning English and ELL Intervention Kits. The goal of these programs is to accelerate ELLs' writing, reading and language levels. The programs are focused on the key competencies of: reading, language, and developmental phonics. ELLs are provided with progressive challenges, differentiation and scaffolded instruction in these three competencies. The program builds background knowledge, a solid vocabulary foundation, reading comprehension and writing concepts. The program also assesses what is taught and provides for differentiation of instruction and assessments. Students will practice reading orally with fluency and comprehension, orally retell stories, and ask and answer higher order questions which will help them to progress in English language skills, particularly speaking and listening. There will be targeted writing activities, with continual checks for understanding. Students will be taught how to use rubrics to improve their writing and guide them in self-assessing. They will have lots of scaffolded practice with writing sentences, paragraphs, and then an essay. Many of the ELL strategies, such as scaffolded instruction, modeled and guided instruction, modeled and guided practice and conceptualization strategies will be incorporated when delivering lessons. As part of the ENL afterschool program, some test prep will be provided to our ELLs and the subgroups to prepare them for the state exams. The materials used in this program are: Ready NY CCLS ELA and Ready NY CCLS Math. For the T afterschool program, Finish Line New York ELLs will be used for ELLs in all grades for practice in preparation for the test and supporting learning English. Throughout the school year, our after school programs will provide help for all ELL students, SWDELLs, and former ELLs on all grade and proficiency levels. Instruction will be provided to support, supplement and enrich the standards-based curriculum utilized during the regular day school program. The following strategies will be included in our instruction: Total Physical Response (TPR) activities to help our ELLs develop vocabulary and appropriate classroom behaviors. We will also use pre-reading activities, e.g., visuals, graphic organizers, and manipulatives to motivate student interest. We will encourage students to activate prior knowledge, and to make personal connections. Role-playing and dramatization with lots of hands-on activities will be utilized during our after school sessions. Money will be allocated for professional salaries at the per session rate with fringes. We will continue to purchase/renew licenses for Imagine Learning English software to build our ELLs speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. This program is rigorous, and is designed to improve ELL proficiency, and reading comprehension skills. In addition, we will use Rourke Classroom ELL/Oral Language Intervention Kits, Continental Finish Line New York ELLs, and In-Step Readers to build students' language proficiency, vocabulary, reading comprehension, and reading fluency with an emphasis on academic content. ELLs will participate in all school related programs, including Saturday STEAM Academy, AIS literacy and mathematics after school programs, and other after school clubs (e.g., Chess Club) and school trips to plays, museums, aquariums, and farms. We will provide funds for admission to any trips taken within the Title III program. For all programs that ELLs participate in, attendance will be taken at each session, and maintained by the ENL Coordinator or someone designated by the coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Professional development is for all teachers who teach academic language and challenging content to all students, including ELLs. We must provide professional learning opportunities for all teachers to collaborate and design instruction, analyze student work, and develop rigorous lessons. By providing substantial and sustained opportunities for all teachers to participate in meaningful professional development, we can address the needs of ELLs, and support language development. In addition, teachers of ELLs need to understand how to increase ELLs' opportunities to learn academic English. They need to learn more comprehension strategies to support students learning English. Professional development will foster teachers who are less accepting of ELLs to change their attitudes, and motivate them to engage ELLs more, which can translate to higher student motivation and performance. The teachers who deliver instruction to ELLs during the regular school day will participate in targeted professional development sessions on a monthly basis. This will also include a study group to help teachers to understand ELLs' needs and how to teach them. The ESL/ENL teacher will be the facilitator of these sessions. ELL network staff will also be invited to facilitate some professional development throughout the year, and other teachers with ESL/ENL extensions or degrees will share pertinent information to encourage best practices . Some examples of topics for workshops include: Increasing ELL Reading Comprehension with Non-fiction Text, Meeting the Needs of Diverse Learners in Grades K-5, English Language Development: Toolkit for ELLs, Effective Ways to Build Academic Vocabulary for ELLs, Needs of English-Language Learners, Reading Comprehension Strategies for ELLs, Instructional Practices for English Learners, Language and Literacy for ELLs, Strategies for Success on NYSESLAT. How to Use ELL Data to Address Specific Language Needs, and Common Core Learning Standards for ELLs in Math and ELA. These workshops would entail planning sessions targeting specific instructional objectives and outlining the activities for each teaching session. During the professional development, agendas and attendance sheets will be given out. Both of these items will be maintained in the school-wide professional development binder and in the ENL files located in the ENL Coordinator's room. In addition, the ENL Coordinator, S. Feggins, and Y. Lee, will attend specific professional development workshops sponsored by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) that focus on strategies to help ELLs. The ESL/ENL teachers will attend appropriate workshops and turnkey relevant information to all staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. The professional learning committee, which includes the ESL/ENL teachers, will also provide staff development during and after school PD time. The professional development will take place monthly beginning October 2018 to June 2019, for a total of 9 sessions, from 2:50 - 3:40 PM or 8:15 - 8:40 AM. The resulting professional development will enhance student language acquisition and increase student achievement on assessments. We will create intentional learning opportunities for all teachers of ELLs to collaborate and design instruction, analyze student work, and develop rigorous lessons. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is an integral part of a child's school life, especially an English Language Learner whose parents may be new to our language and culture. It is important for parents to be informed of City and State standards, obtain information about state exams, and any programs that can enhance their child's education and hence success and overall academic progress. Our goal is to provide parents with resources that will enable them to make informed decisions about their child's education. During the year, we will have parent workshops around the various themes that will be beneficial to the parents. The following are examples of titles of workshops planned: October - Behavior Management in the Classroom; November - Conflict vs. Bullying; December - Cyberbullying; January - Test Anxiety; February - Immigration; March - ADHD/Autism; April - Hygiene; and May - Understanding Your Child's Challenging Behavior. The parental involvement provided at our school for our ELL parents are held in conjunction with our school's parent coordinator. The Parent Coordinator, E. Arnold, who is bilingual (Spanish), the language of the majority of parents of ELLs in our school, provides ongoing workshops to enhance parenting skills and to inform parents of best practices they can do with their children. In addition, there is an ESL/ENL Language Class for parents to learn and enhance their English skills. It is held once a week, for one hour, beginning November 2018 and ending in May 2019. There will be a total of approximately sixteen sessions. Materials will be provided for parents to use and take home. Refreshments will be provided as allocated by the guidelines under the Title III plan and will not exceed the stated amount. Parents of ELLs are also invited to participate in all parent activities in our school, i.e., Parent Book of the Month workshops (monthly), Art and Technology workshops, CookShop for Families, School Wellness Council & Family Fun Nights, Leader in Me Family Engagement/Parent Workshops, and ELA, Mathematics and Test Prep workshops. In addition, parents will be invited to attend citywide ELL conferences. Some of our ELL parents are on the School Leadership Team and are part of the Parents Association in our school. The schedule for the parent workshops is as follows: Parent Book of the Month is the last Wednesday of each month from October 2018 to June 2019, CookShop is once a month beginning in December on Tuesday for one hour; Family Fun Nights is the third Tuesday of every month for one hour at 3:00, Family Fitness Night also once a month; ELA, NYSESLAT, and Mathematics Test Prep workshops are given once a year in the month of March. Two sessions are given for the test prep workshops--morning and afternoon. The School Leadership Team occurs every month on the last Monday of the month from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. Some of the presenters for the workshops include S. Bherwani (Assistant Principal), H. Sosnovsky (Assistant Principal); G. Gerloven (Physical Education/AIS); A. Popovic (Art teacher/AIS); D. Whitecavage (Speech); T. Winston (IEP/SETSS); J. Sehn (bilingual teacher); E. Arnold (Parent Coordinator); Y. Lee (bilingual ENL teacher) and S. Feggins (ENL Coordinator). Announcements for these workshops will be written in parents' native language. The information will be presented on fliers, letters, in a newsletter to the parents in parents' home language and shown on the school's TV monitor. In addition, the parent coordinator will contact 2018-19 CEP 75 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities parents of ELLs who signed up for any of the programs mentioned above to encourage parents to attend workshops. At each workshop, agendas will be given out and attendance will be taken. These documents will be kept in the ENL Compliance binder and in the school's Parent Engagement binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 76  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Rosa Parks School Borough Queens School Number 254 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pamela Markham Coach Tracey Friedman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher S. Feggins/ Y. Lee Teacher/Subject Area J. Sehn/ 4th grade Teacher/Subject Area S. Gibson/ 4th grade Related-Service Provider T. Winston Superintendent Jennifer Ambert Assistant Principal H. Sosnovsky/ E. Bherwani Coach Stephanie Pastor School Counselor S. Esposito Parent D. Farquharson Parent Coordinator E. Arnold Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) Diane Whitecavage - Speech C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 604 2018-19 CEP 77 Total number of ELLs 123 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs are: Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments, Go Math! and teacher-created assessments. For Fountas and Pinnell, teachers assess students to find out if they are meeting benchmarks. Some of the information assessed with these assessment tools are vocabulary, phonemic awareness, sight words, listening and writing, reading, decoding and comprehension skills. These tools are used constantly to ascertain where and how the child is progressing and to help inform and adjust the instructional plan. The Fountas and Pinnell assessment show that ELLs need more time to develop vocabulary skills, learn sight words, develop decoding and fluency skills. We use Go Math! assessments throughout the lessons / units to assess if our students understood the concept, "Show What You Know"; and provide information to guide instructional adjustments, such as, whether the concept has to be re-taught 2018-19 CEP 78  using different strategies and tools. We provide checkpoints to monitor if students understood the concepts for any given chapter. Throughout the lessons, teacher-created assessments, and checklists are used to ascertain whether our ELLs are learning the material needed to advance to the next level in the learning of the concepts. Based on the scores received on these assessments, teachers of ELLs will plan what needs to be re-taught or what can be further taught in the curriculum. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place to support our ELLs is to use a freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program in which instruction is provided in English. Our school uses the two types of ENL as per CR Part 154. Two certified ENL teachers deliver instruction in a stand-alone ENL and integrated model for specified ELLs according to their proficiency levels. Two dually certified ENL teachers, will also deliver instruction for integrated ENL classes. For the integrated ENL, the ENL teachers and classroom teachers work collaboratively to provide strategies to strengthen ELLs' oral, listening, reading and writing skills. The program model here at P.S. 254 is: heterogeneous, whereby all ELLs with mixed proficiency levels are in one or two classes on a grade in which ENL teachers push in to for the integrated periods. The data help inform our school's instructional plan in the following ways: Teachers of ELLs will provide more hands-on activities in literacy and mathematics; more opportunities will be provided for ELLs to develop vocabulary; focus on fluency instruction will be incorporated in activities that focus on word identification; instruction will be supported by realia, pictures, and other visuals for hands-on experiences; grouping ELLs correctly, according to their skill and English proficiency levels; the use of guided reading and writing groups to improve skills; phonics and mathematics games will be utilized to help students who need a more tactile experience; think-alouds, and modeling will be used daily to help ELLs improve their literacy and mathematics skills; and other proven best practices will be incorporated throughout the school year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The baseline/benchmark assessments that we are using to identify baseline progress and areas of need are: Fountas and Pinnell. In Fountas and Pinnell, teachers assess students to find out if they are meeting benchmarks throughout the school year: the beginning, middle, and at the end. Some of the information assessed with these assessment tools are vocabulary, phonemic awareness, sight words, listening and writing, reading, decoding and comprehension skills. These tools are used constantly to ascertain where and how the child is progressing and to help inform and adjust the instructional plan. The New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) will be used to determine the level of English support and to plan a program for each student based on their strengths and needs in each of the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. This test indicates the proficiency level of the student as entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, or commanding. Based on their level of proficiency, services will be provided for 360 minutes, 180 minutes or 90 minutes. In addition, we will use standardized achievement tests, e.g., New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to measure English proficiency on a yearly basis in the four language domains (listening, reading, writing, and speaking), state ELA, state Math, and state Science exams. As students show continuous progress in advancing from beginner/entering, low intermediate/emerging, intermediate/transitioning, advanced/expanding levels and finally to English proficiency/commanding levels on the NYSESLAT, we will program them accordingly. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place to address interventions are: direct instruction in small groups, differentiating instruction using methods and staff, teacher devised action plans using programs and evaluating student work (data dive), professional development, ongoing progress monitoring, student-teacher conferences, and self-assessments. 2018-19 CEP 79  ELLs will be given many opportunities to interact with print-rich environment, including but not limited to, access to books, word walls, labels and posters, and student work on bulletin boards. We will aid student comprehension by scaffolding the language, providing realia, using graphic organizers, visuals, etc. We will support academic language development by using methodologies such as, previewing the text, teaching relevant grammatical structures, and demonstrating how the targeted academic language is used in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. In addition, we will provide students with frequent opportunities to work together in pairs and small groups to help with learning the concepts and content of English language. Some activities include, students working together as problem-solver and coach, think-pair-share, and using cooperative learning to help students develop and practice the skills they need. We also implement an effective correction/feedback policy to help students progress in language proficiency. To do so, we will focus on one or two concepts at a time when listening to or reading students' work. After they master the areas that are told to focus on, then another set will be addressed. Another structure we have in place is collaboration with the IEP teacher, speech teachers, content area teachers, parents and other support staff to glean valuable information about students' language patterns or difficulties. We meet with these constituents throughout the school year to keep informed and to inform about student work and progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 254 follows the guidelines of the RtI model used in the Department of Education (DOE). Our ELL population are provided with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs, and based on the results of teacher made assessments in English Language Arts (ELA). As a precursor to providing the right kind of intervention, teachers and service providers investigate students' educational and linguistic histories. This will ensure that practitioners are able to build upon the linguistic capabilities students bring to the classroom and understand where challenges may lie. The RtI model consists of 4 steps which is implemented to meet the ELLs' specific need. 1) Universal screening, using the Home Language Identification Survey to help guide linguistically responsive instructional choices, enables the teacher to uncover factors that could influence students' English language learning process. In addition, Fountas and Pinnell is used to benchmark the ELL to assess whether his/her literacy skills and competencies are meeting benchmark levels. If the student is found to be at-risk, or below-benchmark levels, the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in a particular area. 2) Tier I instruction is delivered to all ELLs in the general education classroom. Teachers provide opportunities for ELLs to engage in purposeful conversations with peers and their teacher. Reading and writing is taught specifically and integrated into each content area. Teachers provide links for ELLs to build background knowledge, while also targeting academically rigorous and challenging instructional goals using instructional supports as needed. 3) ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and competencies measured are provided with intensive, targeted intervention. Research based ESL strategies will be utilized, and native language used to ensure the student will benefit from the instruction. 4) Progress monitoring data will be used to ensure that the students are progressing, taking into account language development and background. Progress monitoring will also be used to make changes in goals, instruction, or services. The data team, which includes the ENL teacher examines the ELA and mathematics state tests. The analysis is done for grades 3 through 5 to glean the areas of growth. These areas of growth inform our instructional focus, comprehension, which we will scaffold with specific strategies to improve our ELLs skills. In addition, we will utilize the RTI Guide: Making it Work Strategies = Solutions, to address specific student needs. This guide provides strategies and resources for addressing the major areas in academic performance, including reading, mathematics, spelling and written language that target areas of processing that underpin academic deficits. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 80  An analysis of assessments such as NYSESLAT, ELA, and Mathematics are examined through the use of the ELL Data Analysis Tool. We will use this tool to analyze whether students made progress or not or met proficiency levels in the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The data from this tool will be used to design appropriate programming for our ELLs. We will use the data to focus on what progress each ELL in our school is making in English proficiency, e.g., NYSESLAT, progress in ELA, and math. We will use this tool to examine the data to understand which modalities students scored better in and close to reaching proficiency. This will provide the data needed to group our students according to their progress. We can decide if it is best to group students by varying skill levels, by the same first language, by the same skill level, or by different 1st languages. In addition, the tool will help us to identify risk factors, and the differences between groups of students who consistently progress toward proficiency and those who do not. Best practices will be identified to duplicate and hence move toward progress and proficiency on the NYSESLAT. We can use this ELL Data Analysis Tool to view the summary report indicating number of SIFE, long-term ELLs, ELLs held over in the past 3 years, ELLs who scored level 1 or 2 on the ELA or mathematics state tests, and the number of ELLs scoring in the first quartile on the NYSESLAT for the past 2 years. The data condensed in this tool will help us to easily view the number of NYSESLAT test-takers who advanced 1 to 4 proficiency levels, regressed 1-4 proficiency levels and remained at the same proficiency level. Based on the data, we can further ascertain the students showing progress in improving in each of the modalities. In light of this, we can group students in the most effective way, whether to guide their progress in achieving success, thus achieving English proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We will disseminate our findings during vertical meetings, professional development and grade meetings as needed. All pedagogical staff will be informed of data collected and analyzed. We will have an ENL committee which will meet monthly to analyze, discuss and share information about ELLs. The ENL teachers will collaborate with classroom teachers to discuss and help ELLs acquire academic skills/language and content simultaneously. Every week the teachers at PS 254 meet for Teacher Team Meetings. The ENL teachers will attend these meetings to inform teachers of the data collected throughout the week via conference notes, observations, checks for understanding, class assessments and any other assessments given to our ELLs. Once a week during vertical meetings we will disseminate findings gleaned from daily/weekly checks for understanding and other assessments. We will use results from state tests, such as the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) and the NYSESLAT to address areas of need. Once a month ENL meetings will take place with all teachers in general education classes and special education classes. We will distribute a needs assessment questionnaire (during the first meeting) and will use this information to address the needs of the teachers and the students. We will ask teachers to identify topics they want addressed during our meetings, and will provide the supports needed. During these meetings we will address the data findings from class work, and state tests. We will use the findings to inform instruction and then we will re-assess in the areas that instruction was given. In addition, once a month the ENL lead teacher will meet with the Pupil Personnel / RTL Committee to analyze data and student progress to make decisions as to whether students require additional help to meet their goals and targets. We will meet with the parents of our ELLs to discuss the progress that their child is making to date or any other parental concerns. This meeting will be in addition to the school-wide parent conferences held throughout the school year. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 81  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational model at P.S. 254Q is a freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program in which instruction is provided in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Our school uses the two types of ENL programs as per CR Part 154. The stand-alone ENL program is delivered by a certified ENL teacher incorporating core content area instruction. We also use the integrated ENL model, in which instruction is delivered by a dually certified teacher in ENL and common branches. The ELLs at our school are grouped heterogeneously, whereby all ELLs with mixed proficiency levels are in one, two or three classes on each grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school uses the two types of ENL programs as per CR Part 154. Two certified ENL teachers deliver instruction in a stand-alone ENL model for entering/beginning and emerging/low intermediate students for 180 minutes or 4 periods per week. For these same groups instruction will also be delivered for 1 unit or 4 periods, totaling 360 minutes per week. To ensure that beginning ELLs acquire English proficiency, we will provide one unit of stand-alone ENL (180 minutes), one unit of integrated ENL (180 min. weekly), and one home language arts class for students who at the entering level. For those students who are emerging, 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL, one unit of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL is contingent on the student need. In addition 1 home language arts class will be provided. For transitioning ELLs, .5 unit of study (90 min. weekly) in ENL/ELA and .5 (90 minutes weekly) will be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/content area contingent on the student need. One home language class will be provided. The students at the expanding/advanced level will have 1 unit (4 periods weekly) of ENL/ELA or other Content Area. The total number of minutes for transitioning and expanding ELLs is 180 minutes per week. In addition, one home language class will be provided. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To deliver instruction in content areas, ENL teachers push in and pull out students. The ENL teachers will provide support and instruction within the confines and context of the general education classroom through collaboration with the classroom teacher. Together we identify skills and concepts appropriate to the grade, language proficiency level (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding), and learning styles of the ELL students. Each ENL teacher scaffolds the concepts, in English, taught by the general education teacher to the ELL students. 2018-19 CEP 82  Our ENL program focuses on developing and teaching students to use academic language skills. Both the teacher and students use academic language to communicate, analyze and explain content. The teacher models the appropriate language and creates opportunities for using academic language. At P.S. 254, ELLs are taught how and when to use learning strategies. Students are shown when and how to use these strategies (teacher modeling) and are given opportunities to practice it. Another of the methodologies we use is to repeat a lot of the concepts in different ways to address students' learning styles. Our program also focuses on differentiated instruction, with multiple entry points, in which material is presented in smaller segments, assignments are expanded over a longer period of time, and instruction is provided within small group settings. Assessment activities are integrated into the program to help gage students’ progress in acquiring the language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The state exams in mathematics and science allows ELLs to read the questions and answer in their home language. If a student is having trouble understanding questions on teacher-made assessments, staff who speak the student's language is asked to translate orally or in writing for the student/subject. We have some resources in mathematics and science in other languages to help with evaluations after learning concepts. In addition, some of the technology resources we use, have the information translated in some of the more common languages that our students' speak. The software programs we use have data tracking which will be utilized to understand the progress and make adjustments as needed for our students. In the 2018 - 2019 school year all students, including ELLs will have as one of their focus to self-evaluate their work. They will use resource/leadership binders to evaluate their work on a weekly basis. The leadership binders will enable our ELLs to set goals and track their work toward meeting their goals. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We have considered Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) students, our newcomers (ELLs in U.S. schools less than three years), our long-term ELLs (students in NYC school six years or more), Former ELLs and our developing ELLs and devised a plan that will include offering SIFE students additional services and support: i.e., extra periods of instruction, AIS, peer tutoring and ENL after school programs. For our SIFE students we will use the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) tool to help determine the student's literacy level in the home language to design appropriate instruction. Our plan for newcomers (newly enrolled ELL students) is to immerse them in day-to-day activities in their classes using ESL methodologies. A major focus will be on phonics-based language development. We will use Rigby’s On Our Way to English Newcomer Kit, which introduces students to basic language, high frequency word activities, and it consists of a home-school connection. In addition, extra periods of ESL instruction will be provided as needed. For newcomers in all grades, there will be a major emphasis on learning the five hundred most frequently used English words, which includes the Dolch Word List. For newcomers in 3 - 5 grades, they will be in placed in afterschool small group instruction to build more English proficiency using Finish Line for ELLs program and the Imagine Learning English technology program. For those developing students who has in the ENL program for 4 to 6 years, small group instruction will be provided using Teachers College Reading and Writing resources, RTI and AIS support services, vocabulary development and other ENL strategies Students will also use Imagine Learning English software program at various times each week. In addition, students will use Strategies to Achieve Reading Success during the after school program. For those students who did not meet the 2018-19 CEP 83  performance standard in writing, small group instruction using Teachers College Reading and Writing activities as well incorporating ESL methodologies to improve students’ writing skills. Also, we will focus on building critical thinking skills in subject areas such as reading, mathematics, science etc. that take students beyond basic comprehension. For students who have been identified as having received ENL services for 7 or more years in our school, we will differentiate instruction, using multiple entry points, and ESL strategies. These students will be placed in small groups with the ENL teacher. The resources entitled: Rourke ELL Intervention Kits; and Finish Line for ELLs: English Proficiency Practice and Language Power will be used. The technology program, Imagine Learning English, will also be used because this program differentiates according to the level and skill of each student. They will also be given RTl and AIS support services. The plan we have devised for Former ELLs is to provide support for them as they continue to receive services for two additional years. They will will given 2 periods a week of integrated ENL in ELA or in a Content Area. They will also have ELL testing accommodations. In addition, Former ELLs are used to help new ELLs acclimatize to their new surroundings. They are part of the buddy system strategy. Former ELLs are also invited to the afterschool programs to help improve reading, writing and mathematics skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The plan devised for our ELL students with special needs is as follows: They will be serviced in small groups using age and grade appropriate materials, such as, visuals, manipulatives, and other ESL techniques with an emphasis on academic vocabulary development, which we will pre-teach. Scaffolding techniques are used extensively with ELLs identified as having special needs. ENL teachers will make sure that everything taught is visual, skill-building and language based. The use of the buddy system to support our SWD will be utilized. The materials used include, but not limited to: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Words Their Way, Go Math!, Treasures English Language Learners' guided reading program, and Journeys guided reading, on students' grade level. For very low functioning SWD-ELLs, who are at the entering or emerging level, Modern Curriculum Press Phonics and Time for Kids' Language Power will be utilized. In addition, teachers will model correct answers for these ELLs and write it so they can copy the information. The use of question stems and Bloom's Taxonomy will be used to access higher-order thinking skills. They will participate in all activities that general education ELLs are privy to and will be assessed according to their IEP mandates. The technology programs we use to help our ELLs with learning English as well as core content are: Imagine Learning English, RAZ-Kids, Brainpop, iReady and Mathletics. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curriculum, plan instruction and schedule our ELL-SWD based on students' individual needs and their IEPs. The ELL teachers, meet and work collaboratively with teachers and other service providers who instruct ELL-SWD to analyze the core curriculum. Since IEP goals are based on the curriculum and the common core state standards, for special education ELLs the focus will be on incorporating IEP goals with ESL mandates and methodologies. These methodologies are designed to make the instruction easier to understand and achieve students' goals. We will use the core curriculum to provide instruction and reinforce concepts students need. Instruction is provided before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers and ENL Providers will work daily to help students progress and develop tasks for ELL-SWDs to meet their goals. Supplemental reading, writing and math programs will be provided to give our ELL-SWDs an opportunity to learn at their level and modality score. The programs: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for reading, the mathematics program, GO Math!, and NYCDOE Passport to Social Studies will used with our ELL-SWD. The ELL teachers make sure that students work in a low anxiety environment as they acquire English proficiency at each language acquisition stage. Teachers will use flexible grouping 2018-19 CEP 84  as they teach strategies and provide scaffolds to ELL-SWDs understand the concepts. The teachers will use cooperative learning groups, Total Physical Response, and modeling to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals. In addition. ENL teachers look at SESIS to determine which students have IEPs and then will adjust the curricular to match their learning needs / goals. Inherent in the goals is the time frame needed to meet their targets. ELL-SWDs will be provided with instruction according to the time frame indicated on their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention in ELA for ELLs is accomplished by using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. The part of the program we will use for our subgroups (entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding students) is the Strategies Handbook. For each subgroup we use the "If…Then" approach to target instruction and monitor progress. The program will help ELLs to develop skills in understanding, speaking, reading and writing in English through integration of academic content appropriate to the student's age, grade level and language skills. For mathematics intervention, ELLs will use GO Math! and learn mathematics skills in English with the help of Spanish pedagogues as available. Differentiated instruction for each subgroup will be provided by ESL teachers. We incorporate the use of manipulatives to help students to understand mathematics concepts better. This hands on learning helps focus students' attention as they naturally want to play with and explore objects. For Science and Social Studies, the ESL teachers will use the materials and resources available to the general education population and provide differentiated instruction using ESL methodologies for each subgroup explicitly. In addition, academic vocabulary instruction in mathematics, science, and social studies is part of everyday instruction. Intervention services is also offered in ELA and mathematics during and after school. The programs used for ELA are: Comprehensive Assessment of Reading Strategies (CARS); Strategies to Achieve Reading Success (STARS); Treasures Triumphs Intervention and New York Ready ELA. For mathematics, we use Strategies to Achieve Mathematics Success and Comprehensive Assessment of Mathematics Strategies to scaffold mathematics for our ELLs and Former ELLs. These programs are comprehensive ones that helps students acquire basic reading and mathematics skills. They offer intensive instruction to accelerate learning of those skills. The programs are designed to focus on phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension and fluency. Mathematics focus on the concepts and skills that prepare students for the rigorous Common Core State Standards. The instruction is scaffolded with ample practice in those skills. In addition, we integrate Imagine Learning English software program into our intervention services. This program targets the essential skills of literacy, vocabulary development, listening, and speaking. It provides scientifically based instruction and ongoing student assessments. We will also incorporate the use of software programs on iPads, which will enable us to help students improve their phonics, vocabulary and comprehension skills. The plan we devised for students who reached proficiency on NYSESLAT is as follows: Parents will be given information, via DOE form letters, that their child will receive services for an additional period of time. They will be given services 2x a week for 90 minutes for an additional two years. These former ELLs will be served according to their needs. Also, former ELLs will have testing accommodations for up to two years after reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, according to a State memo. We plan to target the ELLs in 3 - 5 grades by pulling them into small groups with the ENL teachers three times a week to work on a particular skill they need additional practice in. During this time, targeted instruction will be provided using the supplemental materials entitled: Finish Line for ELLs, for additional English proficiency practice. ELLs will be referred to at-risk services to help attain English proficiency. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We would like to improve our students' writing skills. Based on writing samples, NYSESLAT and teacher observations we noticed that the ELLs are having a lot of trouble with writing independently. Discussions with their classroom teachers helped us to conclude that this is an area of need. Therefore, we are supplementing our Teachers College writing program with 2018-19 CEP 85  Treasures' for ELLs writing. This will be for all ELLs for all grade levels. We will follow each grade's norming protocols and will use rubrics, self-assessment checklists, modeling, and writing resources to improve ELLs writing. The ENL teachers will collaborate with the general and special education teachers to design lessons which will follow CCLS and English Language Learning Progressions. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs, general and special education students with disabilities (SWD), are afforded equal access to all school programs. They are invited to participate in all after school programs offered on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and some Saturdays during the school year. These programs include: AIS ELA, mathematics, and various clubs. In addition, ELLs will participate in all other school related programs, including STEAM Saturday Academy. ELLs will go on trips with their classmates to various Broadway plays and events, museums, aquariums, and farms. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the following instructional materials to support the learning of all ELLs: classroom materials, i.e. leveled and other guided reading books in English and students’ native language, manipulatives, supplemental materials — i.e., ESL software (Imagine Learning English), bilingual dictionaries/picture dictionaries, wall charts, word walls, pictures and other visuals, grammar student books and workbooks, Newcomer kits, for the entering/beginners—which include vocabulary development and conversation activities that cover basic grammar. In addition, we will be using Teachers' College Reading and Writing Project, GO Math, and other programs that align with the Common Core Standards that is supported by the DOE. ELLs also have access to the school-wide technology programs, e.g., Brainpop, RAZ-Kids, ThinkCentral and Mathletics. For each of the following subgroups - Entering, Emerging, Transitioning - we will use Treasures English Language Learners program, Modern Curriculum Press Phonics; Hooked on Phonics; and Language Power by Teacher Created Materials. For the subgroups - Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding, we will use the following: Treasures English Language Learners program; Hooked on Phonics; Language Power by Teacher Created Materials; and Antanasio and Associates Language Proficiency Kits. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in our ENL program in the following ways: use of classroom materials, i.e., leveled and other reading books in English and students’ native language (bilingual books), manipulatives, supplemental materials—i.e., ESL software (Imagine Learning English), bilingual dictionaries/picture dictionaries, wall charts, word walls, pictures and other visuals, grammar student books and workbooks, Newcomer kits which include vocabulary development and conversation activities that cover basic grammar. Our students are supported in their native language in these specific ways: Our school has acquired literacy leveled books for our ELLs in their native language in the library and in the classroom. Teachers and paraprofessionals who speak the students’ native language will provide academic support. In addition, staff who speak the students’ native language will provide instruction as needed. In Social Studies, the program used is New York City Passport and in science students use Harcourt Science which the ENL teachers will support with and apply ESL methodologies. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources are provided according to students' grade and age levels throughout the school. If student is in grades K, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, resources are provided to accommodate the students’ needs and abilities. If a student is in an upper grade and has not yet acquired the needed skills to progress in the grade he / she is presently in, resources at that 2018-19 CEP 86  student’s level will be provided and will progress to higher levels as needed. Students who score at the beginning levels (entering and emerging) will also receive support services from the SETSS teacher. They will be given services in areas of need according to the NYSESLAT results from the previous school year. We examine and analyze the results from the NYSESLAT and group students according to their needs for an allotted time. When we assess students regarding their progress, we will examine the results and make decisions about new groupings. If a student has an Individualized Education Plan (IEP), they will receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and Student with Disabilities, when appropriate. They will receive Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches when they are at the lower levels of English proficiency and any other required services written on their IEPs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are in a school with District 75. We participate in some school wide activities, such as: assemblies, 5th grade graduation, and other 5th grade activities, breakfast and lunch. We do not coordinate any other efforts associated with ensuring our ELLs' needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Some of the activities we offer to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year is as follows: summer enrichment program for ELLs in a neighborhood school, provide information about the availability of ESL books and websites, e.g., bilingual books and educational websites (RAZ-Kids, Starfall.com, Mathletics), and information about any ESL programs offered at local libraries. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development is designed to ensure that all staff who work with ELLs understand their role in working with ELLs, the state and city mandates so that ELLs get the optimum help needed, and the strategies that will help ELLs acquire the second language (English) successfully. We will have workshops during the designated professional learning time. On professional development days, we will present topics that are needed to help our teachers work with our ELLs in more meaningful ways, i.e. general principles and best practices for ELL instruction. Some professional development workshops will inform and discuss with staff the culture of students' communities and ways our students develop social and academic language. 2018-19 CEP 87  In addition, we will inform teachers or other staff of professional development opportunities offered by DELLSS. The assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinator will be informed of all professional development opportunities in our school and by DELLSS geared toward the needs of ELLs. Our professional development will include topics that will help teachers and other staff who work with ELLs to help improve the four modalities. ENL teachers and other consultants will provide workshops and turnkey information to help teachers understand mandates for ELLs. Topics include but are not limited to—Background Knowledge & Brainstorming Activity, How to Analyze NYSESLAT Data, Effective Strategies to Help ELLs, Supporting ELLs in Mathematics Classroom, Scaffolding the Teaching of Reading, Vocabulary Building, NYSESLAT training, Using Technology to Improve English Language Development and Using Data to Plan Instruction. Our professional development will continue to evolve as we observe and are told by teachers what their needs are to help ELLs succeed. The workshops will follow a format of giving information, e.g., what the research states; a discussion--which includes an activity; and then a question and answer time. Examples of the activities we will use to help teachers of ELLs are: carousel brainstorm; show how to use total physical response; demonstrate the scaffolded strategy with vocabulary; demonstrate how to use technology program--Imagine Learning English. To ensure that our general education teachers and special education teachers receive the mandated hours (7.5 and 10 hours respectively) we will provide the following training for all staff. Workshops during school and before school, i.e., lunch-and-learns during school hours, full day professional development days and before school professional development. These workshops will be given by the ENL specialists and professional staff developers who are invited to present topics that are pertinent to the staff's needs. In addition, ENL teachers will attend staff development given by their district and the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS). Staff will also be provided opportunities to visit the ENL teachers as they work with their small groups to use these times to fulfill their requirements. At each workshop attendance is recorded. The professional development offered to teachers of ELLs to support CCLS are provided by the professional learning team, which includes the ENL coordinator, on questioning techniques, differentiated instruction, designing effective lessons, close reading, guided reading and writing, etc. Professional development (PD) is offered on a monthly basis, and during professional development days to all teachers of ELLs. The focus topics include, but are not limited to: language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Teachers will be trained on how to use ESL strategies to support CCLS instruction. They will be given opportunities to learn how to use student work, assessments, and technology to support ELLs as they deliver instruction. The ENL coordinator will give teachers opportunities to ask specific questions regarding implementation of strategies in alignment with the CCSS. Teachers will use a "worksheet" with questions that assess their ELLs and the strategies they applied. This will be discussed and teachers will collaborate on the most effective ways to help their English Language students. After the strategies and other teaching methods are applied, another assessment will occur to find out the progress made. The ENL coordinator will attend monthly professional development at the district level and will share information with all teachers at the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support we offer staff to assist ELLs as they transition to middle school is to provide workshops that inform staff as to what programs are offered in middle school. We inform staff of the type of scores / grades are required for students to get into specialty middle schools / programs. Staff is provided with workshops so that they can inform ELLs of what is needed to succeed in middle school. ELLs are given information as to who the point person for the ENL program is in their particular 2018-19 CEP 88  choice of school. In addition, the middle schools send representatives to our school to explain programs offered at their schools. Staff have an opportunity to understand what is being offered so they can help ELLs and their parents make informed choices. We will create opportunities for 5 th grade teachers to collaborate, discuss and plan how to help ELLs as they transition to middle school. Students will be provided with instructional strategies that will enable them to access content-specific curriculum and materials. During the professional learning periods, professional development will be provided for all teachers to address the needs of ELLs. The focus will be on learning about ELL language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For the 50% professional development requirement for ENL teachers, the topics will include language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. An ELL Committee, made up of the supervisor of ELLs, the ENL coordinator, ELL teachers, parent coordinator, and paraprofessionals, will meet weekly to discuss ESL strategies, and best practices for ELLs in learning English, and other core content subjects. Teachers of ELLs will be given teacher-made assignments for ELLs, designed to track progress of ELLs according to the issue and the ESL strategy applied. In addition, the ENL coordinator will attend monthly district meetings to receive ELL-specific professional development. Attendance sheets and agendas for each meeting will be kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school staff (e.g., the ENL teacher, teacher, parent coordinator) will meet with the parents of our ELLs at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, parent orientations, and other DOE scheduled meetings, to discuss the goals of the ENL program and their child's language development progress. In addition, the discussion will entail the results of the English language proficiency results (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT), and the language development needs in all content areas. During the meeting, an interpreter/translator will be available at the parent's request. We will use the translation and interpretation services. We will meet with parents during Parent Engagement time, on Mondays throughout the entire school year, and attendance will be recorded. For parents who are unable to attend on the days for parent engagement, other available days and times will be used to meet with the parents, to discuss their child's progress in English and other content areas. In addition, phone calls will be made and letters will be sent if it difficult for the parent to use the time set aside during parent engagement. An attendance/sign-in sheet will be available at each meeting. Telephone logs will be used, and copies of letters will be kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parental involvement provided at our school for our ELL parents is as follows: The parent coordinator provides ongoing workshops to enhance parenting skills and to inform parents of services available for them. The parent coordinator provides translation services for Spanish speaking parents. The parent coordinator also helps parents with the intake process, and will work with parents to complete forms, answer questions and helps with daily living skills. The parent coordinator will conduct an ENL class for parents on a weekly basis. 2018-19 CEP 89  Parents are invited to volunteer as translators during meetings, i.e. Parent Association, Parent Teacher Conferences, and other school activities. Parents are invited to participate in all parent activities in our school. For example, they will be able to take part in Parent Book of the Month workshops (monthly), Cookshop for Families, Art and Technology workshops, Monthly math workshops, Monthly Family Fun Night events for parents and students, ELA, Mathematics, Science and NYSESLAT Test Prep workshops, Leader in Me Family Workshops, Pre-K Learning Through Play workshops, Prepare for the Future Night, monthly School Leadership Team meetings, Coffee and Conversation with the Principal, Family Fun Night, Family Fitness Night, Pre-K and Kindergarten Orientation. They will be invited to help with school publications (e.g., pamphlets, monthly calendar, newsletters and letters to parents) which will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events, including testing dates, school events, open school week, .and other activities that will foster communication between teacher and the home, Parents are encouraged to volunteer to help during the school year. There is also an ENL class for parents held on a monthly basis. The parent coordinator and other parent volunteers provide training in English for non-English speaking parents. In addition, local community organizations will have workshops for the parents throughout the school year. These workshops will be based on the needs of the parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 90 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pamela Markham, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 91  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Rosa Parks School School DBN: 27Q254 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pamela Markham Title Principal H. Sosnovsky Assistant Principal E. Arnold S. Feggins Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher D. Farquharson Parent J. Sehn / 4th grade Teacher/Subject Area S. Gibson / 4th grade Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Pastor Tracey Friedman Coach Coach S. Esposito Mary Barton Joshua Metz T. Winston School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Administrator Other Related Services Provider Diane Whitecavage Other Speech Yoon Lee Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 2018-19 CEP 92  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q254 School Name: The Rosa Parks School Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Sherma N/A N/A N/A Feggins ENL Teacher N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies we used to assess P. S. 254’s written and oral needs were: Parental requests for explanations of written notices and letters on a continuous basis. In addition, there was a lack of response when information was sent home in English only, versus when information was sent home in parents’ native language. We observed the need for translation of information during Parent Association meetings and other workshops/meetings. We also used data from the Home Language Identification Surveys to identify the languages used to accurately provide the interpretation needed. Also, during past Parent Teacher 2018-19 CEP 93  Conferences, we observed the number of languages spoken and the amount of parents that needed translation. P.S. 254Q is located in a culturally diverse community and many languages are spoken by parents and students. Our school determines the primary language spoken by each parent through the Home Language Identification Survey, Part III. In addition, we use the RAPL report from ATS. Also, our school determines if parents need language assistance to communicate effectively with the Department by asking them if they require such. This information is recorded. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Chinese Bengali Arabic Sudanese Uzbek Ukrainian Polish Mandarin English Slovak 305 28 13 6 1 2 2 2 0 568 1 32.87 3.02 1.4 0.65 0.11 0.22 0.22 0.22 0 61.21 0.11 307 26 13 6 1 2 2 2 1 567 1 33.08 2.8 1.4 0.65 0.11 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.11 61.1 0.11 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Curriculum Night (Parent Conference) September 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use school-based personnel (bilingual staff) and DOE T&I Unit for 2018-19 CEP 94  Parent Teacher Conference announcements November, March, May New York State Testing dates March/ April/ May/ June School Calendar September 2018 - June 2019 translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages Use DOE Intranet template for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages I will submit for LT& I Unit free of charge 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum nights September 2018 Parent Teacher Conferences November 2018; March 2019; May 2019 Parent workshops September 2018 - June 2019 ESL/ENL meetings September, October 2018 IEP meetings September 2018 - June 2019 interpretation service(s)? We will use bilingual staff (in-house); for other languages we will use on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We will use bilingual staff (in-house); and over the phone interpretation service We will use bilingual staff (in-house); for other languages we will use on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We will use bilingual staff (in-house); for other languages we will use on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We will use bilingual staff (in-house); and over the phone interpretation service 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The principal will formulate a letter, and have that letter translated in the 15 languages available to have on site in case of emergency. In addition, if there aren't enough staff who speak certain languages, we will provide Over-the-Phone Interpretation Service. 2018-19 CEP 95  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, I will show the video, and share other key resources to inform staff members. In November 2018 a meeting will be scheduled on how teachers and other staff can utilize the translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Language Assistance Services information in the targeted languages will be posted near the entrance of the school, in the front lobby at all times, according to Chancellor's Regulations A-663. The Parents Bill of Rights, Welcome Poster and Parent brochures will be used to inform our parent population of the translation and interpretation services available. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms we use at our school to gather feedback are: School Survey for Parents at the end of the school year, and will ask for suggestions during Coffee and Conversation with the Principal; PA meetings, and parent workshops. 2018-19 CEP 96 
