2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75Q255 School Name: P.S. Q255 Principal: RICHARD MAROWITZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P255Q 307500014255 K - 12 School Number (DBN): 75Q255 158-40 76 th Rd., Flushing, NY 11366 718-380-1247 718-380-2295 Phone Number: Fax: Erica Hanson, Asst. Principal ehanson@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Gregg Lopez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Laurence Fitzpatrick N/A Gregg Lopez N/A Non-Ttle1 School Our students are severely disabled students with autism and cannot participatein iPlanmeetings. Please call if you have any questions. Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Ave., New York, NY 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1520 Phone Number: 718-857-0565 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: D075 Executive Director’s Office Address: Dr. Jude Arthur Executive Director: 400 First Ave. New York, NY 10010 jarthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 718-706-4531 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Gregg Lopez Laurence Fitzpatrick Elizabeth Durand N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Inez Cruz Tonya Gittens Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Elected UFT Member/Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Jonathan Durand Cristina Caridad Janet Herrera Debbie Kaye Sue Athanasakis Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Elected UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Elected UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview "Our school is committed to pursuing educational options and providing “best practices” which support our students and their families.” This quote is an essential component of our school's mission and vision. P255 implements best practices for students with Autism Spectrum Disorder and seeks to balance academic and functional rigor based upon each learner's needs. 2018-19 CEP 9  “School is a reflective learning environment where we need to continually evaluate the teaching process and its impact on student outcomes. P255 provides a seamless environment that integrates literacy, technology, the arts, and a positive behavior support system. A standards based instructional program is implemented, which addresses the needs of students within a modified general education curriculum. A successful school consists of collaboration between school, home and the community and is integral to achieving our school vision.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. “ At P255 Queens, our primary goal is to have all students achieve their maximum independence. In order to succeed, a varied learning environment is essential for our children to learn and develop their skills. P255 believes that the collaboration between school and home is an essential and necessary part of our organization. This relationship is fostered and encouraged the moment students enter our school. Our Family Network Grant offers us the opportunity to support parents with various speakers, workshops and respite services. Parent and sibling support groups, monthly gym nights and other educational and integrative activities (Holiday and Spring Shows, School Dances, and Family Fun Night,) promote parent involvement. Our school counselors and parent coordinator facilitate meetings that provide pertinent information to help parents. Teachers are given agendas with information and talking points to share with parents and families during Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences. Parent workshops and support groups are held during the day and evening to maximize parent involvement. Unique features of P255: ● Communication: Each student is provided with a voice through a variety of Primary Mode of Communication systems. Parents and caregivers are provided training specific to their child’s communication needs. ● New Teacher Support: School Based Coach provides a voluntary meeting before the school year starts where new teachers can meet with administrators and ask questions before the beginning of the school year. The meeting includes information on SESIS, assessments and curriculum. ● Reading, Math, and Toileting Profiles: Every classroom teacher completes a profile chart for their class identifying each student's reading and math instructional programs as well as tracking toileting/activities of daily living needs. ● Respect For All and No Place For Hate: one of our elementary sites has won awards for their dedication and participation in programs and activities for No Place For Hate. ● Radio Spot: one of our middle school classes has created a radio broadcast. ● Gallop Program: our 151 and 154 sites participate in a therapeutic horseback riding program. ● Collaboration in our co-located sites with our general education counterparts.  Partnerships with Marquis Studios and VSA NYC Calendar submissions  2017-2018 District 75 school that had the opportunity to participate with Daniel's Music Foundation  Six of our co-located sites have built collaborative relationships with their general education counterparts to increase opportunities for our learners  Our Townsend Harris High School site partners with job sites in the local community to provide access and exposure to vocational opportunities to build career readiness.  2018 District 75 Spelling Bee Champions 1st and 2nd place. 2018-19 CEP 10   The Instructional Focus for P255Q is Providing Multiple Pathways (entry points) To Learning which allows teachers to accommodate a variety of learning styles and differentiate to a variety of student's needs.  Girl's Club: teacher's and related service providers facilitate learning and social activities for girls attending our program across elementary sites. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At P255 our primary goal is to have our students achieve their maximum independence. All aspects of our program focus on student achievement towards independence in the areas of community living, communication, self-management skills and vocational skills. Being that 99% of P255 population consists of students with autism, we are able to concentrate on this population and provide research based methodologies recognized in the field of autism. We feel the following instructional practices promote learning and provide a path to college and career readiness to our unique population: ● TEACCH/Structured Teaching ● ABA Methodologies ● Positive Behavior Supports ● PECS – Picture Exchange Communication System and AAC Communication Systems ● Social skills training ● Thinking Maps ● College and career readiness practices: community school based job experiences, travel training, community integration experiences 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past couple of school years, P255 has made great progress in making instruction more rigorous for our students. This was accomplished by assuring that all of our diverse learners have access to the Common Core Standards with a focus on the anchor standards and identified instructional shifts in ELA and Math. By providing multiple pathways to learning, our students are able to engage in more rigorous instruction and increase individual achievements. A challenge that our school has faced was related to the element of Collaborative Teachers. P255Q is a special education program which consists of eight sites throughout Queens. All teachers are collaborative but communicating across eight sites can be challenging. However, our school has utilized technology and school wide committees to build collaboration and cohesion. Our school has made the most progress in Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. In reflecting upon our 2017-2018 goals, we are proud of the success and outcomes that have come out of our Readtopia pilot in our middle 2018-19 CEP 11  school and high school sites. We are also celebrating the expectations and learning that came from our school's inquiry into the following resource: Essential For Living. The following are P255’s key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 1. Rigorous Instruction 2. Supportive Environment 3. Collaborative Teachers 4. Effective School Leadership 5. Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q255 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 411 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 73.2% % Reduced Lunch 40.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 37.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 1.7% 99.8% 10.5% 19.2% 2.9% 8 10% 8.5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: P255Q is expecting a Quality Review to take place in the 2018-2019 school year. Our last quality review took place in 2013. Based upon a multi- year summary from our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide of Framework Element Scores from 2016-2018 favorable ratings of Rigorous Instruction have steadily increased over the past three years based upon results from all stakeholders. 1. P255Q has consistently had successful outcomes for CEP goals based upon elements of Rigorous Instruction. Assessment results drive curriculum and program choices every school year. Our school has created a "Guide To Programs" resource which is available at every site to help teachers identify the most appropriate programs and curriculum's for our learners. In the 2017-2018 school year, lead teachers, administrators and the school based coach have attended District 75 Professional Development Opportunities to deepen our understanding of SANDI, data analysis, and the Essential Elements. Based upon the results of our School Performance Survey for 2017-2018, scores related to rigorous instruction have steadily increased since 2016. One of our strengths according to teachers is having resources and tools for planning instructional units related to the Common Core Shifts in Literacy. Teachers also responded favorably that the students have various opportunities to interact with complex grade level text. 2. In order to continue providing rigorous instruction, we have decided to participate in a SANDI Pilot through the Office of Periodic Assessment for the 2018-2019 school year. We believe that piloting SANDI Instructional Kits will provide valuable information to our teachers about student's varying needs thus fostering rigorous instruction. As a result of feedback received from District 75's Deputy Superintendent's school visit in May 2018, we have reached out to the District to elicit additional support from the Assessment and Accountability team on Progress Monitoring Systems. 2018-19 CEP 14  The SANDI Instructional Kits will provide instructional activity ideas for small group instruction that target priority skills aligned with the SANDI assessment. Teachers and school leaders will be able to look critically at SANDI scores to identify Level 1 and Level 2 learners needs aligned to ELA and Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, targeted teachers will pilot one level in each subject area utilizing the SANDI (Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory) assessment and SANDI instructional kits for their students in 6:1::1 classes across grade bands 3-5 and 6-8. Progress will be monitored through pre-pilot vs. post-pilot SANDI assessment results for piloting classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). * Communication between school and District Office of Assessment Accountability about Progress Monitoring Systems. *Administrative team and Cabinet Meetings to discuss participation in SANDI Instructional kits pilot supported by Periodic Assessment Team. *Identify targeted participating teachers and students in planning for the 2018-2019 school year. * Teachers will receive instructional kits at their respective sites to be stored for 2018-2019 school year and meet for initial planning for the pilot with School Based Coach. *Teachers will attend any one full day training on the Overview of the Instructional Kits (pre pilot) * Instructional Kits Pilot Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students of 6:1:1 in grade bands 3-5 and 6-8. Students that have taken the SANDI assessment and have been identified as Level 1 or Level 2 learners Targeted Level 1 and Level 2 learners in 3-5 and 6-8 6:1:1 classrooms June 2018 *Classroom teachers *Administrators *School Coach *Office of Periodic Assessment June 2018 *Administrators *School Coach *Unit Coordinators *Classroom Teachers Administrators, Teachers, School Coach, Curriculum Committee Members, Lead Teachers/Unit Coordinators, Office of Periodic Assessment Personnel Throughout the 2018-2019 school year *Oversight will include: periodic data analysis, learning walks, and administrator oberservations. 2018-19 CEP 16  * Teachers will attend any one of the full day sessions to discuss pilot observations for the instructional kits. (post pilot) Spring 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Office of Periodic Assessment Personnel Targeted Level 1 and Level 2 learners in 3-5 and 6-8 6:1:1 classrooms 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Ongoing communication with parents to share student progress (report cards, communication notebooks, parent teacher conferences) -At SLT meetings, staff will share information about SANDI with parent leaders. -At Fall 2018 parent teacher conferences teachers will share assessment results with parents. -At Spring 2019 parent teacher conferences teachers will share assessment results with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school will take advantage of the opportunity to participate in The Office of Period Assessment pilot. Schedule adjustments will be made to accommodate meetings with School Based Coach and participating piloting teachers from our participating sites. Coordinators will assist in making schedule adjustments to allow the piloting teachers to meet at the main site as needed through out the pilot. Substitue teachers will be utilized when piloting teachers are required to attend District trainings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, piloting teachers will have conducted a minimum of 3 SANDI skill based lessons in the areas of ELA or Math and data will be recorded based upon student performance in each of the lessons. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI Skill based lesson plans will be collected and analyzed. Student data and work products reflecting SANDI skill based learning. Evaluation of IEP goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive Environment: 1. According to School Quality Guide results from the 2017-2018 school year, the areas of safety and social emotional were identified as strengths in teacher responses related to the element of Supportive Environment. Due to the nature of our student's severe disabilities, there were not any student responses to any of of the items in the survey related to supported environment. All of the questions for students resulted in N/A. Student demographics show that our student population consists overwhelmingly of male students with a 4:1 male to female ratio. To encourage and foster a supportive environment, our sites have formed Girl's Clubs which allow for female students to work with teachers and staff on commutation, social skills and special activities for girls. 2. In order to challenge students academically, we want to prioritize science instruction across our classrooms for the 2018-2019 school year. Based upon the analysis of bi-monthly Unique Curriculum pre and post testing of Essential Questions for the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years, we have noticed that our students perform better and demonstrate higher interest in science based bi-monthly curriculum themes when compared to social studies based thematic units of study.Science is a subject area that was addressed utilizing elements of the Unique curriculum. However in looking deeper at the Essential Elements and New York State Alternate Assessment expectations, we need to support Science instruction across all grade bands. (k-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12) All stakeholders in our organization will work together to create a supportive environment that is exemplifies high expectations for rigor and learning in all subject areas. 3. Our school believes in supporting the whole child through targeting priority areas related to autism such as communication, social skills, and behavior. The Social Skills Checklist and Behavior Checklists are used to aid in the development of an individualized behavior support plan or social skills plan for each student every school year. We have a school wide positive behavior support team as well as a school wide social skills committee. Additionally, we provide access and exposure to The Next Generation Learning Standards utilizing Essential Elements. P255Q believes that a school consists of ongoing collaboration between the school, home, and community. As we embark upon the 2018-2019 school year we are conscientious of providing both academic and functional rigor to support our students. P255Q is committed to best practices for students with Autism and rely upon a combination of the Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children (TEACCH) methodology and Applied Behavior Analysis as pillars to our program. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 19  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, K-2 grade band teachers will utilize the Science A-Z.com program, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12 grade band teachers will utilize Science curriculum resources from the Attainment Company to facilitate science lessons at least two periods per week across 6:1:1, 8:1:1, and 12:1:1 classrooms. Student progress in Science will be measured by grades and prompts indicated three times per year on each student's report card, subject area- science. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analysis of Spring 2018 assessment data/results with a focus on the subject of science. Analysis of Science Report Card and Progress At A Glance Results for all classes. Administrative Team and Coach attend District 75 Curriculum Fair to research Science curriculum options for our students. All alternate assessment learners in grade bands k-2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12. June 2018-September 2018 Classroom Teachers, School Coach, Unit Coordinators, Assistant Principals Distribution of science curriculum and program materials to all classrooms. Professional Development for teachers to implement new science curriculum and programs. Systems to provide oversight will include supervisory observations, class inter-visitations, and curriculum committee meetings. Administrators, Unit Coordinators, Teachers, School Coach, Personnel from the Attainment Company Assistant Principals All 6:1:1, 8:1:1, and 12:1:1 classroom teams and students Classroom teachers and School Leaders Fall 2018 October 2018-June 2019 Initial training to implement the following science curricula across grade bands: All classroom teachers across sites School Based Coach and Trainer from the 2018-19 CEP 21  k-2: Science a-z.com 3-5: Attainment's Early Science Curriculum 6-8: Attainment's Science Step by Step Curriculum 9-12: Attainment's Explore Life Science Teaching of differentiated science lessons across all classrooms. Recording of progress and data in the subject area of science. *ENL students will receive additional supports from paraprofessionals and ENL teachers as they participate in science lessons and grade bands. Attainment Company. November 6th, 2018 All students 2018-2019 school year Administrators and School Coach ENL teachers and Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals ENL learners across all sites and classrooms on-going 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Progress At A Glance individualized updates will be sent home with report cards to provide parent with information about student progress toward science expectations. -At Parent Teacher Conferences teachers will provide parents with information about the science curriculum and program resources that their child is utilizing in the classroom. -Differentiated science homework assignments will be given throughout the school year to target specific skills. -AT SLT meetings, parents will be informed about how the CCLS/Essential Elements are embedded in science and how students are alternately assessed in the area of science-NYSAA. (New York State Alternate Assessment) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Money 2018-19 CEP 22  District 75 Professional Development Opportunities and Coach Support Site schedule adjustments to accommodate school wide collaboration and growth NYSTL funds Chancellor's Conference Day for Staff Development Schedule adjustments to allow lead teachers to participate in school wide meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, collaborating teachers will have implemented and shared a minimum of two specifically designed small group science lessons during Professional Learning Community Meetings. By February 2019, a minimum of two training/supportive meetings will have occurred. By February 2019, report card and progress at a glance results will be provided for each student. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress At A Glance and Report Card documents for each individual student. Supervisor reviews of teacher's science lessons and classroom visits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon feedback from Quality Reviews, our school has thoughtfully developed Professional Learning Communities that meet at least twice a week in every site. Professional Learning Communities provide teachers with varied opportunities to participate in professional development. According to the School Quality Guide Multi- Year Summary, all stakeholders have reported positive feedback and ratings related to the element of Collaborative Teachers. In 2018, the Framework Element Score was 4.50 and the Survey Element Score was 4.01. Teachers across P255Q's eight sites often collaborate to improve outcomes for students and identify best practices in the field of autism-special education. P255Q has an array of assessment and planning tools for students with autism. As a school, we continue to seek ways to improve our curriculum, assessment process and professional practice especially for our early learners who require the direct teaching of functional and self help skills to improve their quality of life and post secondary outcomes. We will continue to collaborate with other District 75 schools and/or District 75 Leaders in order to get more information about professional resources which will target the needs of our early level, functional learners: The Assessment of Functional Living Skills. (AFLS) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a collaborative inquiry team will meet and engage in an inquiry study to determine the most effective use for the following professional resource: The Assessment of Functional Living Skills (AFLS). A written synopsis of the inquiry work will be provided to support the outcome of the study on the AFLS. A minimum of four collaborative inquiry meetings with all team members will take place from October 2018-June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lead Teachers, Administrators, School Coach Lead Teachers, Administrators, School Coach Create a Collaborative Inquiry Team of Lead teachers and administrators to review, discuss and gather more information about The Assessment of Functional Living Skills. Lead Teachers Fall 2018 Administrators ongoing Collaborative Inquiry Team Meetings will be held at least 3 times during the school year. k-2 and 3-5 grade band 6:1:1 learners Assessment data collected from the Web ABLLS-R and SANDI assessments will be used to guide inquiry work and decision making. on-going Create a timeline or a list of inquiry focus to guide discussion during Collaborative Inquiry Team Meetings Administrators Fall 2018 Administrators, School Coach School Coach Communication with District 75 Leaders to inquire and gather more information about AFLS Determine and Collaborate with other District 75 schools who are using AFLS 2018-19 CEP 25  Professional Networking/Development to gather information about the AFLS The team will meet bi-monthly to collaborate and provide a written summary of their findings and recommendations about how to integrate AFLS for the 2019-2020 school year. Possible outcomes may be assessment, a reference manual, or other means of enhancing outcomes for severely disabled, early level learners in our school. Systems of oversight will be include accountability of inquiry team members completing required reading and independent inquiry then coming back to team meetings with their findings and results into AFLS. Lead Teachers and inquiry team members Ongoing throughout 2019-2020 school year Lead teachers and inquiry team members Inquiry Team Members Ongoing Lead teachers and inquiry team members Assistant Principal Ongoing Inquiry Team Members Based upon findings from the inquiry, make a recommendation of how to utilize the AFLS resource to enhance student outcomes for 2019-2020 school year. ENL teachers and speech providers. Spring 2019 Administrators One of our school's ENL teachers and a speech therapist will provide their feedback on Essentials For Living as it pertains to enhancing communication outcomes. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  - AT SLT meetings, parents will be informed and updated about the Collaborative Inquiry on the Assessment of Functional Skills study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional money and MOSL funds to purchase Guides and Specific Protocols for AFLS for Inquiry team members and professional libraries. Also teacher per session and supervisor per session may be used for before or after school inquiry tasks. Schedule adjustments will be made to allow inquiry members from each site to attend the collaborative inquiry meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Collaborative Inquiry Team will have met a minimum of 1 time to review and discuss the new professional resource: The Assessment of Functional Living Skills. A mid year update of findings will be typed (2-3 pages) and shared with key stakeholders by February 28th, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Collaborative Inquiry Team Agendas/Sign In Sheets, and Notes/Minutes from inquiry meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June 2018, P255Q's Principal for the last 20 years retired. One of P255Q's Assistant Principals has gone through the C-30 process and is starting the 2018-2019 school year. Our school's revised mission and vision statements reflect high expectations and support of all stakeholders. Achievement in mathematics instruction has been growing over recent school years and the school leaders want to continue this trend and bring the achievment from our five elementary school sites into our one middle school site and small high school site. School leadership will support the implementation and differentiation of the Equal's math curriculum for our secondary level 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 learners. 1. According to Learning Environment Survey Results from the 2017-2018 school year, 84% of teachers said that the Principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. As we embark upon the 2018-2019 school year, we would like to see this percentage increase. Effective School Leadership is demonstrated through on-going professional development and support opportunities for all stakeholders. Lifelong learning is an integral component of our vision. Instructional support is reinforced through stakeholders signing up for District 75 professional development courses, outside professional development courses, and workshops that teachers find independently and request time to attend. Inter-visitation opportunities allows teachers to observe effective pedagogical approaches that they can learn to implement for their own classrooms. 2. Pedagogues receive social-emotional support that drives student achievement through Professional Learning Community Team meetings which occur at all sites at least twice a week for all teachers. Teachers also receive support from buddy teachers, mentors, unit coordinators, and our school based coach. Academic and functional skills are crucial to our student's development and contribute to positive post secondary outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will assist and guide grade band 6-8 and 9-12 alternately assessed middle school classroom teachers in identifying and implementing a minimum of two functional math chapters (calendar skills, money skills, time skills, measurement) taken from the Equals Mathematics Curriculum to enhance student's math skills and 2018-19 CEP 28  independence. Student progress in the two identified chapters will be monitored through "Equals Math Data Skill Tracking Sheets." Student progress data will be reviewed by June 26, 2019. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Inventory of Equals Curriculum kits from all 255Q sites. Identification of Chapters from Equals that target functional skills. Classroom teachers will meet with Unit Coordinator and Assistant Principal to select functional Equals Chapters for instruction based upon Fall assessment results. Oversight will include classroom inter-visitations and supervisory classroom observations during Equal's math instructional time. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? June 2018 School Administrators, lead teachers, school based coach September -October 2018 Teachers, Unit Coordinator, Administrators, School Coach 6-8 and 9-12 grade band, 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 alternate assessment learners 6-8 and 9-12 grade band, 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 alternate assessment learners Equals Functional Mathematics Classroom Instruction and Progress Monitoring teachers and administrators Ongoing 2018-2019 school year Teachers and Administrators *ENL students will receive additional supports from paraprofessionals and ENL teachers as they participate in Equals Mathematics functional lessons All alternate assessment ENL learners in 6-8 and 9-12 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 grade 2018-2019 school year On-going School Administrators 2018-19 CEP 30  band classrooms. ENL teachers and Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Functional homework assignments will be given as part of our school's homework policy. Parents will be receive a grade band specific curriculum map so they can see the balance of academic and functional curriculum that each student is provided with at 255Q. Equal's Functional Mathematics Skills and Lessons from Chapters will be encouraged help promote generalization of skills in the home setting. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. For all of our 6-8 and 9-12 classroom to effectively implement Equal's Curriculum-- Functional Mathematics lessons, school leadership will make sure the following adjustments are made: *On going professional development and support of teacher's professional growth through workshops, trainings, and inter visitation opportunities. *School coach and mentors will nurture and provide social emotional support. * School wide Professional Learning Community meetings. 2018-19 CEP 31  *Schedule adjustments *Instructional resources (Equals Math Curriculum Kits and Manipulatives) will be brought to the middle school site from elementary sites where there are surplus resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all 6-8 and 9-12 classroom teachers will have identified and began teaching at least one of two required chapters of instruction for their 6:1:1 or 8:1:1 learners. School administrator will collect and review each classes Equal's Math Data Skill Tracking Sheets to monitor student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collection utilizing IEP data collection sheets for math goals and Equal's math data skill tracking sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong Family and Community Ties hit a high score of 4.22 in 2018 according to the Multi Year Summary Of Framework Element Scores. The survey element score in 2018 was 4.08. Strong Family and Community Ties has been an area of celebration that our school is proud of. Strong Family and Community Ties are emphasized in our recently updated school vision and mission statements. 1. According to school survey results from the 2017-2018 school year, 98% of families reported that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. P255Q has high levels of family engagement and participation in a variety of school activities. We are one of two schools in Queens that receives funding from OPWDD and each school year, we utilize that funding for our Family Network Grant. Many families participate in integrative activities such as Dances and Gym Night. However, we want to have greater parent participation in trainings for the 2018-2019 school year. 2. A priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this element is increased, individualized and targeted parent training opportunities specific to their child's AAC (Augmentative and Alternative Communication) system/device. Based upon information obtained from SESIS, approximately 60 students currently have IEP mandated AAC devices/systems for communication. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a minimum of five percent of parents/caregivers of targeted students will come in to the school for training specific to their child's AAC device/communication system. Speech teachers of targeted 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 learners will provide the trainings for parents/caregivers. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identify each P255Q student with an IEP mandated AAC devices/systems. (i.e. Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), Language Acquistion Through Motor Planning (LAMP). Alternate assessment 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 students Fall 2018 Speech and Language Teachers, Unit Coordinators, Classroom Teachers, SESIS liaison Begin developing partnerships with families All students and families Fall 2018 All 255Q stakeholders Prepare targeted parent training opportunities for parents and caregivers Students with AAC devices October-June Speech and language teachers ENL teachers and Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals will support Communication in the school setting ENL teacher, paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. OPWDD-Family Network Grant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher schedule adjustments for individual parent training workshops 2018-19 CEP 34  Support from District 75 Speech Supervisor Training and Professional Development for teachers from District 75 Speech Department. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum of 5 individual parent trainings about student AAC systems will have been provided by speech teachers. 2% of parents/guardians will have attended at least one training by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family Network Grant reports and individual summary sheets. Sign in sheets for attendance at sessions/meetings between parent/guardian and speech teacher(s). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are assessed utilizing an array of assessments due to significant disabilities. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Edmark Reading Program Small group During the school day Adapted Fountas and Pinnell One-to-one And Tutorials Reading A-Z Adapted Fountasand Pinnellfor non verbal students Words Their Way Handwriting Without Tears Mathematics All students are assessed utilizing an array of assessments due to significant disabilities. SMILE Thinking Maps Attainment Curriculum Resources, Small group During the school day One-to-one EQUALS Curriculum, And Tutorials Science Early Numeracyassessment, Student Annual Needs Determination (SANDI) All students are assessed utilizing an array of assessment tools. UNIQUE Curriculum, Attainment Science Curriculum, Science a-z.com Small group During the school day One-to-one 2018-19 CEP 36 Unique Curriculum pre and post testing of essential questions. All students are assessed utilizing an array of assessmenttools. Unique Curriculum aggregate data for social studies topics. Targeted students are identified and assessed based upon individual needs and IEPmandates. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) News-2-You and Small group During the school day Discovery Education One-to-one And Tutorials Girl's Club, Small group During the school day Breakfast Buddies, One-to-one Buddy Up Program, Counseling-Related Service provided by guidance counselor 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). O 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  0 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 41  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P255Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P255Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 44  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P255Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 45  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale The ENL teachers will focus on New Language Progressions (NLAP). Students in the program will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and sensitivity in communicating with others of varied social, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds. They will develop and use culturally appropriate behaviors as well as build knowledge of local and U.S. cultural practices in their interactions with others in their new cultural environment. All students who are offered this program are diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder and are currently in a staffing ratio of 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1. Students’ language proficiency ranges from Entering (EN) to Commanding (CM) as per 2018 NYSESLAT LAB-R and NYSITELL test scores (K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6 grade range). All of the students are assessed yearly using NYSAA, WEB ABBLS-R and SANDI. The activities will be extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas by combining the interdisciplinary/thematic approach with ENL methodologies. Methodologies include: Language Experience Approach, Whole Language and Total Physical Response (TPR) as well as best practices, strategies using multi-sensory approaches, cooperative learning, the infusion of the arts, and the use of technology. Academic rigor will be aligned with IEP goals and instructional practices addressed during the school day. Additionally, multi-sensory approaches, in conjunction with Augmentative Communication Devices and Pictorial/Symbolic representations, will be used. Content Area Instruction will follow the CCLS, ELA and Math extensions for Science & Social Studies as well as the Go Noodle program for physical fitness. The use of technology will be incorporated into ENL and content area instruction to give students additional support. Multi-sensory and multicultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction. The importance of providing instruction to ELLs that is communication-focused is supported by research (S. Krashen, 1984, McKenzie-Brown, P. 2006). Research also reveals that integrating technology into instruction for ELLs increases writing (Enhancing the Writing Development of English Language Learners: Teacher Perceptions of Common Technology in Project-Based Learning (Teresa S. Foulger & Margarita Jimenez-Silva Published online: 03 Nov 2009). In addition, using the TEACCH approach supports language development with students with autism. This approach is supported by empirical research (Mesibov, G.B., Shea, V., & Schopler, E. (with Adams, L., Burgess, S., Chapman, S.M., Merkler, E., Mosconi, M., Tanner, C. & Van Bourgondien, M.E., 2005). Grade Levels of Students to be Served: 18 Students in 6:1:1, 8:1: and 12:1:1 Grades: 1-2, 3-4, 5, Schedule and Duration: P.255Q@P7 has proposed a six-week after school program that will run for three hours a day, two days a week, a total of thirty-six hours of instruction. The program will run Wednesday and Thursday from 3:10pm- 6:10pm. Projected start date will be Wednesday February 27, 2019 through Wednesday April 10, 2019. Language of Instruction: EnglishTypes of Certified Teachers: Three ENL 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teachers are required .In addition six paraprofessionals are required. Three paraprofessionals are included for students who are in need of Crisis and health Management. "Paraprofessionals provide extra support to (...at risk) students, freeing teachers to focus intensively on instruction. Most aides live in the schools’ communities and have a special understanding of students’ lives and circumstances. To give every child the opportunity to succeed, we must hold students and teachers to high standards, reduce class size in the early grades and ensure that schools are safe and orderly. And we must continue to allow paraprofessionals, properly trained and deployed, to support disadvantaged youngsters so that they, too, can fulfill their potential" (Feldman, 1999). A school administrator will be scheduled to the after-school school on Wednesday and Thursday from 3:30 PM to 6:10PM (Administrator's Regular hours are from 7:30AM to 3:30PM).Types of Materials: The theme of the Title III program will be "Adapted Maker Space". The daily focus will use project based learning elements of Science, Technology Engineering, and Math (STEM) in addition to social skills and English Language Arts. The students will participate in differentiated small group instruction as well as large group facilitated activities. Instruction will be delivered through a variety of technological devices and STEM based instructional and educational tinkers. The Adaptive Maker Space will program will incorporate the use of children collaborating together in a space to create, make and tinker. Students will learn design and construction across six to nine stations through the use of LEGO Education, and Tinker STEM projects. They will also learn coding through robotics; Ozobots and Little Bits as well as functional skills and such as building, and other activities. By the end of the Adaptive Maker Space Program, the students will create several projects with their friends, teachers and parents. The materials for the Adapted Maker Space will be stored in a STEM rolling cart for easy access during the transition of activities. New iPads and iPad accessories will be purchased to replace older accessories that have been decommissioned and in poor condition.The students will utilizing materials and applications from previous year's program such as; Bright Fingers to learn and support typing skills. The program will incorporate the school's thematic provided by the Unique Learning System to guide instruction and project based learning activities. The students will be using the following applications to create Project Based Learning activities: The teachers will be using Nearpod with students with a one year subscription. Nearpod is an interactive assessment and presentation tool that allows students to be engaged and immerse themselves in learning. Early iPad learners will be using the following application Tiny Hands: Tiny Hands Apps are developmental apps put together with certified child psychologists and produced to be exciting and interesting and content specific (for example; sorting, matching, categorizing by feature function and class). Teachers will also be using Boardmaker to support instruction by creating interactive books online and communication boards. All the ELL students involved in the program will be assessed via teacher-made materials in the form of pre and post tests utilizing appropriate rubrics. Student work products will also be used to monitor their progress, the assessment of which will follow a specific rubric. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development The paraprofessionals working in the Title III program will participate in five hours of professional development on creating a maker space for children with autism. Paraprofessionals will be trained on I pad and Low Tech STEM projects. The ENL teachers Yubis Lopez, Laurence Fitzpatrick, Kyriaki Xiraki-Tselios (trainers) will be training the 5 paraprofessionals (trainees)."It is critical for veteran teachers (and paraprofessionals) to have ongoing and regular opportunities to learn from each other. Ongoing professional development keeps teachers (... and paraprofessionals) up-to-date on new research on how children learn, emerging technology tools for the classroom, new curriculum resources, and more. The best professional development is ongoing, experiential, collaborative, and connected to and derived from working with students and understanding their culture." (https://www.edutopia.org/teacher-development-introduction 10/28/16) "Science is a “way of thinking,” engineering and technology can be thought of as “ways of doing.” The ongoing PDs are based on the notion that "the way of doing" is ever changing since technology around us is incessantly evolving.Science supports skills in the domain of Logic & Reasoning by encouraging children to:See cause and effect, compare objects, engage in symbolic representation with drawings, models, and movement.It promotes Language Development and Literacy Knowledge & Skills when children: Learn complex vocabulary, have opportunities for conversation. practice close observation, a necessary skill for reading.It encourages gains in Approaches to Learning because children:Have opportunities to show creativity and inventiveness, work together with peers, engage with interesting and hands-on activities, which is particularly important for some children with special needs and dual-language learners, persist and wait when experiments last several days.Science strengthens Mathematics Knowledge & Skills with opportunities for children to:Measure, count results, graph outcomes. All these add up to improved school readiness. "Science is the process of learning about the world around us. We—adults and children—do that naturally by observing, asking questions, predicting, investigating, and discussing. This is the scientific method. Adults and children do these steps in many different orders." As ENL teachers we are moving forward and apply new learning experiences in our teaching. Technology has become in integral part of life and that has can be seamlessly transferred to everyday teaching activities. After all "children naturally engage in exploring the world around them. We now know that young children are capable of learning complex topics with effective scaffolding from adults."(clkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/ttasystem/teaching/practice/docs/science-know-presenter-notes-what-why.pdf -Retrieved09/16/16) Schedule and Duration: Professional development will begin on Tuesday February 26, 2019 at 3:10-6:10PMTopics to be Covered: Tuesday February 26, 2019 : Orientation presentation, Curriculum planning, material presentation, program objectives, student learning objectives, student alerts and parental focus. Lead by: Yubis Lopez, Laurence Fitzpatrick, Kyriaki Xiraki-Tselios Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Rationale:The parents will be invited to participate with their children in various activities. They will be involved in familiarize themselves with different learning web tools that will help them with language and IEP goal carry over at home.Additional resources form parent involvement such as subscriptions and iPad app purchases willSchedule and Duration:Every parent will receive a written notification inviting them to attend the Adaptive Maker Space program. Parents will be invited to workshops that will be held on Wednesdays and/Thursdays from 5:00PM to 6:00PM.Topics to be Covered:The focus will take on a hands-on approach to training parents on using iPad apps and various technology from high tech to low tech to create projects. Parents will receive individual folders of training materials and additional resources such as: visual supports, schedules, educational websites, iPad apps and home based projects. Video tutorials and examples of student work and projects will be provided on DVD. Parents will have an opportunity to learn, build create and tinker side by side with their child at the Adapted Maker Space for one hour.The school's thematic units from the Unique learning System that involve science will be implemented. We will be also using the Go Noodle website activities which includes the ENL methodology of Total Physical Response (TPR). Go Noodle is a program that is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Go Noodle offers fun-filled speaking, listening and readings activities that keep students engaged and learning while moving and following directions. The parents will be trained to create a free parent subscription and taught how to use Go Noodle at home. Research shows that involved parents enhance the skills of ELLs, as they are connected to the home-school community. "ELLs perform better when parents are involved in their education" (B. Harry, 2004; J Cummings, 1984). Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Direct Instruction $15,955.38 PD PD allocation $1,361.34 Total: $17,316.72 DIRECT INSTRUCTION: ADMINISTRATOR: 2.5(hrs) x 12(days) x $63.45 (rate)= $1,903.50 (total). TEACHERS: 3(hrs)x 12(days)x $60.65(rate) x 3 teachers= $6,550.20 (total) PARAPROFESSIONALS 3(hrs) x 12(days) x 34.73(rate) x 6 paraprofesionals= $7,501.68 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATOR 3(hrs)x 63.45 (rate)= $190.35 TEACHERS 3(hrs)x60.65(rate)x 3 teachers= $545.85 2018-19 CEP 54 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Dollar amounts allocated for direct instruction and professional development are assigned to administrator, teachers and paraprofessionals to implement the 2018-2019 Title III  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Adapted Maker Space Program. None PARAPROFESSIONALS 3(hrs)x34.73(rate)x 6 paraprofesionals= $625.14 Purchased services  High __NA_ quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $3,625.28 Parent Refreshments: $24.94/per student x 18= $449 Tech Teaching Easel: $842 x 2= $1,684.80 iPad 6 Gen 32GB: $290 x 4 =$1,160 iPad 6 Gen Cases: $16 x 6 = $96 iPad Screen Protector (2PK): $12 x 3 = $36 Apple Pencil: $86 x 2=$172 0 0 PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT $11.00 4 metro cards x $2.75x 4 rides= $11 Parent Refreshments and Materials are purchased to implement the 2018-2019 Title III Adapted Maker Space Program. none none Travel expense for parents to participate in the program 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Title III program. NONE TOTAL $20,925.52 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P 255 Q Borough Queens School Number 255 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gregg Lopez Coach Vernice Borleo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laurence Fitzpatrick Teacher/Subject Area Kyriaki Xiraki-Tselios ENL Teacher/Subject Area Yubis Lopez ENL Related-Service Provider Sharen Lopez Superintendent Assistant Principal Michael DiAngelo Coach School Counselor MaryEllen Barnes Parent Elizabeth Durand Parent Coordinator Nora Eckert Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 424 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 156 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 36.79%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 4 3 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Curriculum-embedded formative assessments used with ELLs include the Edmark Reading Program, SRA Reading Mastery, Fountas & Pinell, Smile and Attainment Math. Results from the SANDI assessment as a Common Core aligned skill assessment support the instructional design and development of Student Present Level of Performance (PLOP) and Individualized Education Program (IEP) goals. During the 2017-2018 school year P255Q will explore how to best utilize the assessment curriculum resource Essential For Living. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As a comprehensive inventory of basic skills the SANDI results reflect a hierarchy of developmental skills and levels of academic proficiency. Within all assessments, strengths and weaknesses are identified. The Fountas and Pinnell inventory provides entry points (graded reading level) for reading instruction. The Smile program is 2018-19 CEP 58  a multi-sensory approach to reading instruction. Smile provides information to support the development of phonemic awareness in early/emergent readers. SRA Reading Mastery direct instruction help provide accurate knowledge of essential decoding and comprehension levels. Assessments conducted provide a comprehensive profile of the individual student, all of which contribute in determining the instructional focus and teaching objectives. Additionally, the programs are tiered in a manner that a student's learning profile can be addressed by one of the above named programs. Data collection taken and analyzed during teacher inquiry meetings provide the basis for evaluation and guide any eventual need to alter and/or modify a student's instructional program. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The Initial summative assessment used is the NYSITELL, which establishes an ELLs baseline proficiency level. Subsequent movement towards proficiency is measured using the NYSESLAT. Student acquisition of skills is primarily acquired through educational programs as reflected in the student's IEP. ELL student progress is monitored during (bi)-annual assessments that are conducted to capture student achievement (NYSAA, Social Skills Checklist, SANDI, Web ABLLS). Information is recorded and used to drive instructional choices. Based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, a data pattern generally emerges reflecting reading and listening modalities as relative strength areas as opposed to the speaking and writing modalities. In each grade level, this pattern is consistent. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Student raw and scale scores are used to make appropriate groupings of ELLs and program choice selections. Groups and individual proficiency levels are reflected District level compliance documents. The responsible committees are the LAP team, the IEP committee and school Administrators. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As a District 75 school serving disabled youngsters our ELLs receive services as per their IEP at a level consistent with or exceeding general education peers within a bona fide Response to Intervention framework. ELL student instructional data are used during DATA review/inquiry meetings. Student progress program effectiveness and interventions are assessed and subject to modification at this time. Students that are identified at this time may, for example, have increased 1:1 discrete trail time to focus on targeted instructional approaches. Conversely, students progressing satisfactorily may be candidates for an IEP amendment to update objectives within methodologies stated in existing IEP goals. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELL student evaluation is measured using (bi)-annual outcome assessments that are conducted as required to capture student achievement (NYSESLAT, NYSAA, Social Skills Checklist, SANDI, Fountas & Pinell). Results are used to modify program choices and inform program effectiveness. Slow growth and prevailing challenges stemming from students' developmental disabilities influence rates of progress when compared to typical non-disabled peers. This discrepancy , i.e. slower than anticipated progress, might otherwise suggest program changes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school's curriculum committee regularly meets to design and evaluate school wide curriculum choices and develop annual school-wide CEP goals. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 59  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As a specialized school for students with autism P255Q students present with moderate to severe cognitive disabilities and are primarily grouped in multi-aged classes of 6 students. Fewer groupings exist of 8 students and one group of 12. Over 98% of the school's student body participates in the New York State Alternate Assessment. Four ENL teachers group students by proficiency and developmental levels. ENL teachers in heterogeneous integrated groupings work collaboratively with the student's classroom teachers . In stand alone ENL model groups teachers work with small homogeneous groups. Student proficiency level and learning style are guiding during formation as stand alone groups often rely on group instruction skills or, as appropriate, address individualized student goals. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE program at PS 255Q is composed of 1 bilingual elementary Spanish classes serving 6 ENLs in Alternate Assessment. The bilingual teacher assigned to these class is NYS certified/NYC licensed and provides instruction in all subject areas. All students in TBE classes are “B” level students who receive a 60/40 ratio Spanish to English instruction. The components of the Bilingual Programs are: 85 minutes a day of NLA instruction is infused during literacy and math instructional blocks. 75 minutes a day of English instruction is infused during math, ELA and Social skills instruction. ALL TBE students are Elementary age. In addition students with a Bilingual status that are not in a TBE class are receiving Alternate language support from a Para-Professional in native language. The Para-Professional in conjunction with the ENL teacher and classroom teacher develop supports to deliver instruction in required minutes. All students in bilingual classes receive the number of units of ENL instruction as required by CR Part 154. To ensure that students meet the standards and pass the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the NYS ENL Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language and Cooperative Learning, in conjunction with Augmentative Communication Devices with Pictorial Symbolic Representations. The use of technology is incorporated to give students additional instructional support. Additional ENL strategies include visual and graphic organizers, time lines and sequenced pictures as well as peer buddies. Multi sensory and multicultural ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of instruction. All students in bilingual classes receive a minimum of 180 minutes per week of Native Language Arts (NLA). NLA instruction follows the tenets of Balanced Literacy, CCLS and uniform curriculum, emphasizing the development of phonics and comprehension skills through literature-based and alternate standards-based materials and activities for students in standardized assessment. NLA instruction in Alternate Assessment is parallel to the literacy instruction imparted in monolingual classes and is provided by a bilingual teacher utilizing native language literacy materials. The instructional strategies used include Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, Multi Sensory Approach and Pictorial / Symbolic Representations in conjunction with Augmentative Communication Devices (e.g.: Say It All, Macaw, Dynamo, Dynamite, Delta Talker, Cheap Talk and Message Mate). These devices are programmed so that children can respond to a variety of stories, therefore ensuring compliance with NYS ELA performance standards. The use of bilingual software and multimedia (such as Board maker, Picture this and Kid Pix) enhances and supports the development of native language skills. When applicable students transition out of TBE classes due to proficiency level score on the NYSESLAT, students are placed in a Monolingual class. In addition students may be placed in monolingual class if determined IEP Services are no longer needed. If this process occurs ENL teacher will meet with the classroom teacher a minimum of 4 times during the school year to monitor student progress. T c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 60  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154, the two models of ENL instruction are utilized: Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL instruction is delivered to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or is co- taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both models of ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. ENL staff members deliver at least one unit of study to all students. When appropriate, ENL staff deliver both models of ENL (stand-alone or integrated) to best meet the needs of all English Language Learners. The teacher schedules are designed in a way that maximize instructional minutes , student instruction is the ENL team's main focus. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P255Q thematic curriculum design incorporate topics and essential questions which address Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers adapt and differentiate content as needed to make lesson aims and objectives comprehensible during integrated units of instruction. When considering stand alone units of instruction ENL teachers will align instruction and delivery to ELL student IEP goals and instructional targets identified within the P255Q thematic curriculum as well as the New Language Art Progressions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Certified Bilingual teachers and bilingual alternate-placement paraprofessionals support the assessment of native/home language proficiency in TBE programs. Teaching directives are translated to ensure student understanding and to assess language dominance as well as student progress in their native language. Bilingual Alternate Placement ELLs are students in English language classrooms. These students benefit from the presence of a native/home language paraprofessional. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. P255Q does not currently have any SIFE students. SIFE students follow the protocol of newcomers to the program and adhere to the LEP process: Parent interview, program selection and required units of instruction. B. Newcomers are assessed and are afforded increased 1:1 intensive instruction. Often this supports the acquisition of many readiness-skills needed for effective participation in the classroom. C. D. For our school's Developing and Long Term ELLs receiving services ENL teachers consult with students’ classroom teachers and related service providers and regularly assess student performance in each of the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Assessment information guides the selection of appropriate goal selection and performance indicators. Students for whom we are applying to receive an Extension of Services receive academic intervention support 30 minutes daily during the academic school day in addition to their CR Part 154 minutes. The interventions provided are research 2018-19 CEP 61  based and school district sanctioned. Interventions include; Edmark Reading program, SRA Reading Mastery, augmentative communication (PECS), Smile Reading program, Unique Learning System. P255Q follows the New York State Bilingual New Language Art Progressions and incorporates ENL strategies such as pre-teaching vocabulary/background knowledge, visual and auditory input, graphic organizers such as Thinking Maps, manipulatives and hands-on activities. Scaffolded instruction is practiced in all subject areas by classroom teachers and cluster teachers. Developing and Long Term ELLs are all students with moderate to severe cognitive and communication disabilities. As such they require a longer period of time to acquire communication. Several P255Q students are in full-time Inclusion settings. These students receive flexible programming alongside their non-disabled general education peers. E. ELLs at Commanding Level are provided an additional two years of ENL services as per CR part 154. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Curriculum choices include the UNIQUE learning system, which is a Common Core aligned program for special education students. It provides unit lesson plans with multiple entry access points with differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with significant disabilities. Professional Learning Communities meet regularly to develop extension activities to P255Q thematic curriculum and Unique Learning System topics. P255Q uses the Edmark Reading Program to support sight word recognition and comprehension skills as well as the Smile Reading Program to support the development of phonemic awareness and decoding skills in emergent readers. In keeping step with new common core requirements P255Q incorporate supportive programs such as Eden Curriculum, Brainpop, Flocabulary and Don Johnston Read-Topia which allows teachers to provide rigorous instruction and students to access the essences in grade level common core curriculum areas. Leveled classroom libraries contain graded readers in English as well as books adapted by teachers to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. A multi-media multi-modality approach to instruction ensures ELL-SWDs use interactive whiteboards with programs such as Classroom Suite. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P255Q is a TEACCH school. Student gross scheduling and communication skills are supported through the use of student schedules and the Picture Exchange Communication System. In keeping with TEACCH principles classrooms are by design set up for small group, independent workstation and 1:1 discrete-trails teaching areas. TEACCH affords the opportunity of many instruction delivery options to support and accelerate English language development. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As part of best practices, an extensive assessment period takes place in September. The language of service is English.Targeted instructional programs are selected at this time to meet ELL student needs. Smile, Edmark and Reading A-Z (English/Spanish version) Read Topia, SRA are used to target ELA instruction. Attainment math, Equals math and Eden math curriculum is used for targeted math instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2017-2018 school year Don Johnston Read Topia will be introduced in grades 6-8 and 9-12 classrooms. Math Interim assessment data will be analyzed and utilized to inform instruction and challenge students in mathematics. Advance end of year data will be used to target components and provide staff development opportunities. Teacher inquiry will focus on how to best utilize the assessment curriculum resource Essential For Living. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A. TBE is not being considered for discontinuation. 2018-19 CEP 62  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs and non-ELLS alike are provided related services and supplemental support services as per their IEP. Services include speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, vision services and counseling. All are afforded equally to all students. In the middle school program at PEC the students are provided access to the District 75 Middle School after school program. ELLs also participate in AHRC after school programs as well as Title III after school program for ELLs 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials provided are research-based and school district sanctioned. Intervention programs include; Edmark Reading Program, Video modeling, Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), Smile Reading Program, Unique Learning System, SRA Reading Mastery. All classrooms are outfitted with Promethean or SmartBoard interactive whiteboard technology and wireless capability. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Through the use of the HLIS and ongoing parent communication language dominance is determined in correlation with student's disabilities. Home language instruction is provided through the use of Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals. Paraprofessionals will instruct students in their native language and assist classroom teachers in meeting individual needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Resources are selected to support the individualized special needs of the student body. Services and resources are designed to meet the developmental levels and the unique learning styles of students with classic autism and related autism spectrum disorders. P255Q teachers are assisted by a robust support staff including an IEP liaison and treasurer/administrator to monitor compliance and delivery of services. Alternate assessment students are grouped in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 or 12:1:1 un-graded classrooms. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In co-located sites, social support groups have been created for students to participate in ongoing collaborative activities. These groups promote social interaction and are connected to the Chancellor's initiative of Respect Of All. The ENL team collaborates with the all school sites and teachers and instruction is seamlessly incorporated on a daily basis. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Student placement is conducted through the District 75 placement office. Unit coordinators and assistant principals meet with parents of prospective students contemplating accepting placement Parents are regularly welcomed to tour of our school sites and see our programs in progress. For parents of ELLs accepting placement the LEP Identification process begins once the student is enrolled at the start of academic school year. ENL teachers and paraprofessionals, who serve as interpreters where needed, meet with parents each September. The Parent Coordinator organizes parent orientations for parents of newcomers each year. Language translation is available to all parents at orientation meetings and support meetings . ELL parents are encouraged to attend parent support groups and sibling support groups that are held throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 63  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P255Q is committed to provided professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all Bilingual and English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition. Emphasis is on content area instruction in the core content areas and best practices in co-teaching strategies integrating language content instruction for English language learners. P255Q teachers, ENL staff included, attend CTLE approved professional development offered by District 75 and beyond. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Records of attendance for staff professional development is maintained by the school's administration. Attendees are issued certificates of completion, which also satisfy state certification requirements. ENL staff maintain records of regular meetings; agendas are drafted and professional development content knowledge is turn-keyed to ENL staff members as required.The ENL team is supported in attending D 75 PD hours to satisfy the 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Through the school's Parent Coordinator survey to assess parents needs, P 255Q will determine and offer parents of ELL’s ongoing information in their home languages and training on different aspects of their children’s education. P 255Q recognizes the importance of parents, family and community involvement in the education of LEP/ELL students. Through our Family Network Grant, the parents of newly enrolled LEP/ELL students will be provided with an orientation on the State Standards, Assessments, achievement of goals, School expectation and general program requirements for bilingual education and ENL programs. Translators are also available to parents at PTA meetings, Parent Support Groups facilitated by guidance counselors and IEP meetings. Agencies such as YAI, QSAC, AHRC, and QCP also provide informational workshops on topic such as-Behavior trainings, Toliet training and estate planning etc…In addition, school information (e.g., School newsletter, meeting notices etc.) are translated into the parent's native language (Chinese, Urdu, Arabic, Spanish, Korean) as needed. Parents are also involved in ongoing collaboration with ELL teachers. Parentes are afforded supports to be used in the home (IE:-Augmentative Communication systems, PECS books). Parents will be trained in these strategies. In addition, ELL parents are active partners in all school activities (Special events-Winter show, Cultural exploration day etc.). Parental involvement plays a major part in PS 255Q’s mission. The Committee of Special Education (CSE) ensures that their meetings are in conjunction with the parents. Since our school provides the program choice of Freestanding ESL and a 2018-19 CEP 64  bilingual program, we guarantee that our new parents understand the philosophy behind our Bilingual and Freestanding ESL program. Through the school’s parent coordinator, Caterina Mercado 255Q offers parents of ELLs ongoing information in their home language and training on different aspects of their education. P 255Q recognizes the importance of parents, family and community involvement in the education of LEP/ELL students. Through our Family Network Grant, the parents of newly enrolled LEP/ELL students will be provided with an orientation on the Common Core Standards, Assessments, achievement of goals, School expectations and general program requirements for bilingual education and ESL programs. Translators are also available to parents at PTA meetings, Parent Support Groups facilitated by guidance counselors and IEP meetings. In addition, school information (e.g., School newsletter, meeting notices etc.) is translated into the parent's native language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL team will deliver at least one unit of study to all students. The team will make every attempt to incorporate both types of ENL (stand-alone or integrated). Parent coordinator plays an integral part of organizing and producing school based trainings specific to our students needs. Requests for translators are made to the coordinator and translation service is provided as needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Richard Marowitz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P255Q School DBN: 75Q255 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Richard Marowitz Gregg Lopez Nora Eckert Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Laurence Fitzpatrick ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Durand Parent Kyriaki Xiraki-Tselios ENL Teacher/Subject Area Yubis Lopez Teacher/Subject Area Vernice Borleo Coach Coach Mary Ellen Barnes School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q255 School Name: P255Q Superintendent: K. Louissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Michael DiAngelo Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Survey IEP Emergency contact cards Informal Communication/ Communication Notebooks 2018-19 CEP 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Cantonese Mandarin Bengali Urdu 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Report Cards IEP Documents that Parent Coordinator Translates for Parents: - Calendar of Activities 2018-19 CEP 69  - Emails to parents - Letters to parents (misc topics, such as community services, etc) - Letters and communications from PTA - Quick News 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conferences IEP Meetings/Reviews PTA Meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 70   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent - Teacher Conferences PTA Meetings/ School Leadership Team Parent Coordinator Outreach Parent Survey 2018-19 CEP 71 
