2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q258 School Name: ENERGY TECH HIGH SCHOOL Principal: HOPE BARTER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Energy Tech High School 30Q258 343000011258 9-14 School Number (DBN): 36-41 28 th Street, Long Island City, NY 11106 718-472-0536 718-472-0490 Phone Number: Fax: Hope Barter hbarter@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Hope Barter ArianaRadcliffe Cornelia Islam and Margarita Bravo Hope Barter Josette Murray DiyaPatel Nikhil Pandey, ReyadYassin(Alt) CBO Representative: N/A Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, New York, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: Room 715 Superintendent’s Email Address: fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov 212-356-3754 212-356-7514 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity CUNY/UA Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY Suite 616 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.935.5618 Phone Number: 718.935.5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hope Barter Ariana Radcliffe Cornelia Islam Daniel Cook Josette Murray NikhilPandey; ReyadYassin(Alt) DiyaPatel N/A Margarita Bravo Charlene Wingate Marie Belfort *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ellen Reyes YonetteGriffith Amanda Garcia ArtiJain OlenaKebalo Langdon Soares Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Energy Tech High School seeks to provide students with a rigorous 6-year experience, with the opportunity to earn a NYS Regents diploma as well as an associate degree in a STEM pathway free of cost. Over the course of the 6-year high school program, students will take a series of high school classes, college courses, and career readiness activities and experiences that are in alignment with fast-growing and in-demand careers in engineering and technology in our local industry. Upon completion of our program, students will be well prepared for tech jobs on a ladder of career growth, or will be strong candidates for 4-year colleges. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Energy Tech High School is an innovative Early College Initiative (ECI) and Career and Technical Education (CTE) program, serving students in grades 9-14. The school follows the Early College and Career (9-14) model, wherein partners from the NYCDOE, CUNY, and industry collaborate to develop a 6-year sequence of high school and college courses as well as career-oriented experiences. The goal of schools like Energy Tech is to carve out unique pathways to in-demand jobs on a ladder of growth in the local economy. Energy Tech is a partnership between the NYCDOE, CUNY, ECI, LaGuardia Community College, Con Edison, and National Grid. The 6-year program is mapped in alignment with engineering and technology careers in the local energy and utility industry, and students will graduate from the program with a cutting-edge AAS degree – free of cost to students. Energy Tech is going into its sixth year of development, and currently serves over 500 students in grades 9 through 14. At the end of Year 5, nearly 96% of rising 14th grade students had successfully met the CUNY benchmark for literacy (e.g. 75+ on the CC English Regents exam), and over 90% had met the CUNY benchmark for mathematics (e.g. 70+ on CC Algebra I/80+ on Integrated Algebra, along with our school-created criteria). 100% of rising 14th grade students have completed at least one college-level course at LaGuardia Community College, and 84% of graduating 12th graders have already some college credit in addition to their high school coursework. Energy Tech currently serves nearly 100 students in its Years 5 & 6 program, and students are taking high-level STEM college coursework, and are additionally taking advantage of a number of academic supports on the LaGuardia Campus. SY 2018-2019 will be Energy Tech's first year at "full capacity". In the coming year, students will be challenged by even more demanding college coursework at LaGuardia in 5 different engineering and tech pathways. We have noted impressive pass rates for courses, with up to 100% pass rates in introductory (100-level) engineering coursework, as well as a strong pass rate in ENG 101, with 85% of students earning a B or higher in Spring 2018. In SY 2017-2018, our community focused on retention in college classes, seeking to lower course withdrawal rates and increasing the percentage of students persisting through rigorous college classes. Our community was successful in meeting this goal. Having focused closely on percentages of students meeting the CUNY benchmarks in mathematics since our school's opening in 2013, we have spent the past three years engaged in research, inquiry, and lab-style professional development series. Having participated in NYCDOE School Time Lab for two years and Algebra for All for one full year, we achieved substantial gains of the Common Core Algebra Regents examination in Spring 2018. Teachers were provided with intensive in-school coaching, out-of-school professional development, upgraded technology, updated curriculum, and online supports. As a result, Energy Tech achieved a higher percentage of rising 10th graders achieving the CUNY mathematics benchmark on their first attempt than ever before. In addition to intensive mathematics instruction and support in the early years of our program, we added additional interventions for older students in grades 12 and 13 who had not yet mastered the CUNY benchmarks for mathematics or literacy. Energy Tech partnered with the CUNY LINCT program, which provided professional development, curriculum, and coaching for a small group of teachers leading small group coursework. Students were engaged in intensive mathematics and English study, and as a result the majority of enrolled math students were able to meet the benchmark based either on a Regents or Accuplacer (CUNY) exam. Reflecting upon the data and the number of students who still need to demonstrate literacy proficiency, Energy Tech will continue this program in the coming year and will add AP English Language and Composition to our sequence in order to better prepare students 2018-19 CEP 10  for ENG101 at the college level. This decision also emanates from qualitative feedback provided by students and college faculty in focus group sessions that were led by an assistant principal. In Year 6, we will further expand our academic intervention and extracurricular enrichment programs. We believe that in order to build a supportive environment and to cultivate strong community ties, having a well-rounded program with multiple non-academic outlets is essential. We worked with MDRC during the spring of 2017 to identify highlights and areas for growth in our advisement model. We restructured planning teams for the development of our Years 5/6 programming, forming several subcommittees focused on various aspects of student and family support within our unique model. Given data collected through surveys, formal focus groups, and student outcomes, we added an additional college counselor for 2017-2018, and participated in the College Access for All initiative, as well as the CUNY CARA program. We tracked goals focused on postsecondary matching and persistence in college programs. Over 95% of graduates were enrolled in postsecondary programs (a range of AS, AAS, BS degree pathways and certificate programs) at the end of SY 2017-2018. In SY 2018-2019, we will add one additional counselor to continue to develop our revised advisement model and provide check-ins and counseling sessions with students as they make key transitions after grades 12 and 14. In school year 2017-2018, Energy Tech continued to develop the 6-year scope and sequence of high school and college coursework, the backbone of college and career preparation courses and experiences, as well as industry exposure events – and progressively internship and other hands-on career development activities. These activities were intended to raise the rigor of student tasks, and also to increase teacher collaboration across departments and also across partnerships. Approximately 70% of rising 13th and 14th grade students have already participated in a semester-long job shadowing intensive or an internship experience. We employ an Industry Liaison through the support of our partnerships, and piloted our first rounds of paid and unpaid internships in Summer 2016 and Spring 2017. In the coming year, we seek to use the data generated from these pilot programs to expand our offerings to include all Years 5 & 6 students. We have expanded internship placements by over 200%, and continue to forge new partnerships with the support of the Queens Chamber of Commerce and the LIC Partnership, who supported us with inaugural student networking fairs in spring of 2017 and fall of 2018 - which have been attended by over 500 students and over 50 businesses. Finally, we successfully applied for and were granted an Americorps VISTA worker to add to our team in 2017-2018, with the intention of further improving college guidance and internship development. We were again awarded an Americorps VISTA worker as well as a New York Public Ally for SY 2018-2019 to support continued career services program development. In efforts related to strong family and community ties, Energy Tech has also focused on increasing parent involvement by offering additional opportunities to access information both about their children’s learning and development, and also about upcoming events, programs, and opportunities at the school. We made great strides in Years 3, 4, and 5 by expanding monthly Community Coffee Hours, weekly parent e-mail blasts, revamped web and social media tools, an expanded SLT, and new PA-developed subcommittees to focus on increased special events for students and families, such as our first round of senior activities. Over the course of the year, our attendance at parent meetings steadily increased, and we look forward to continued efforts in Year 6. Also related to our school community, we successfully launched a partnership with Western Queens Consultation at the end of Year 3, which resulted in an on-site mental health clinic and expanded services for both students and families. We currently have over 20 students and families being served through this partnership. In SY 2018-2019, we intend to respond to feedback from parents and families on the NYCDOE School Survey, and will offer at least one opportunity in each department for parents to visit the school to see their children present work. 2018-19 CEP 11  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Energy Tech serves a diverse community of over 28 different home languages, students with disabilities, English Language Learners, etc. Students with disabilities comprise approximately 17% of the Energy Tech student population, and approximately 5% of our students are English Language Learners - with a much higher percentage of students who are classified as "former English Language Learners". Energy Tech prepares all students for the early college experiences, and supports students through accelerated study and career training. Data reveals that current and former ELLs need additional support with writing, as evidenced by NYSESLAT and English Regents data. Within our special education population, we have identified both academic needs as well as social skill development needs for focus to better support students in achieving internship placements and participating in early college coursework. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-2018, Energy Tech made the most progress in Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. This was evidenced by our school survey data, internal curriculum review, review of teacher Advance data, attendance data, and CUNY proficiency metrics. Students participated in AP coursework for the first time, and the school also introduced the Seal of Biliteracy. We also tracked advisement check-ins, college/postsecondary matching data, college persistence rates, and retention rates of students at various stages of our program. In 2018-2019, Energy Tech will focus most closely on Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family and Community Ties based on data emanating from the NYCDOE School Survey, and teacher feedback surveys, progress made in last year's CEP, and feedback from school partners in quarterly planning meetings. In considering Collaborative Teachers, we also consulted with our college data, having identified a disconnect between performance in the terminal high school courses and entry-level college courses in certain disciplines. In reflecting upon this progress, we additionally consulted with graduation data, college readiness benchmark data, and scholarship reports. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q258 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12,13,14 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 511 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 10 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 64.2% % Reduced Lunch 2.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 54.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 4% 28% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 93% 89.1% 19.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 37 29 15 92.2% 11.7% 17.0% 9.6% 18.2% 4.5% 2 16% 2.1 N/A N/A 90% 92% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive annual review of data relating to rigorous instruction at Energy Tech was conducted by closely analyzing STARS scholarship reports, NYSED Regents examination reports and item analyses, Skedula reports, grade and content team minutes and work products, teacher anecdotal records and information, Quality Review and PPR feedback, curriculum and lesson review, and student feedback. In both NYC school surveys and a school-generated survey developed in partnership with Early College Initiative at CUNY, students self-reported that “they need to work hard to get good grades”. We also reviewed the numbers and percentages of students attending after-school, Saturday, and summer support and enrichment activities - as well as the percentages of students participating in college coursework, internships, and other college- and career-ready activities. Review of Regents and scholarship data points to strong performance as compared to the city and the state. Over 91% of students successfully passed history Regents examinations, with the majority of rising 13th grade students earning an 85+ on the U.S. History exam. In this area, we have surpassed last year's goal. In 2016-2017, we raised our Common Core Algebra pass rate by over 20%, and we substantially raised the average score and percentage of students earning the CUNY benchmark with the support of Algebra for All, an updated master schedule, external coaching, and the addition of CUNY Tutor Corps. We forged partnership with Algebra for All, CUNY LINCT, CUNY Math Start, CUNY Start, Algebra Boost, CUNY College Focus, School Time Lab, ReDesign, and STEM Solutions to redesign STEM curriculum for increased growth. Energy Tech graduated 93% of Cohort S, with additional students graduating this year within the 6-year window. Many members of Cohort S are projected to graduate once again in December 2018 or June 2019 with a 2-year college degree. Based on a review of curriculum and student performance, Energy Tech seeks to continue its focus on the percentages of students successfully completing four years of mathematics and science, to ensure that we are in alignment with our rigorous STEM mission. During SY 2017-2018, we targeted withdrawal rates from upper-level dual credit college courses, and will focus advisement in SY 2018-2019 in this area. We will additionally add AP Computer Science to our course offerings, as well as continued Fabrication Science and Robotics coursework offered in conjunction with NYC FIRST at the Cornell Tech/Roosevelt Island campus. We have hired additional STEM staff to create and implement demanding STEM coursework and electives, and to make continued use of our newly upgraded engineering facilities and maker space. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 14  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor for the Energy Tech student experience, as evidenced by a 10% increase in the number of students successfully completing 4 years of college-ready mathematics and science coursework. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Mathematics consultant works with Geometry teacher to revise curriculum map based on June 2018 Regents data July - August 2018 College Liaison All students Algebra department continues to attend Algebra for All training through NYCDOE and makes revisions to curriculum map based on June 2018 Regents data School hires additional mathematics instructor in order to add new Pre-calculus coursework to scope and sequence to better support students in MAT 115 and MAT 200 Programming team reviews all student schedules to ensure that all students are programmed in 4-year sequences of mathematics and science coursework School makes upgrades to site-based Maker Space, and plans year-long calendar of events in conjunction with NYC FIRST Maker Space (Roosevelt Island) Learning Partners team disaggregates school data to identify groups of students who are not on track to complete 4 years of math and science coursework and conducts student focus groups to gather more information Math department implements baseline assessments across all courses and identifies students for at-risk tutoring and support (after-school and Saturday Academy) Guidance Counselors Principal Assistant Principals Teacher leaders Math consultant September - December College Liaison All students External Coaches Guidance Counselors 2018-19 CEP 16  Designated teacher, AP, and College Liaison roll out mathematics supports on the college campus, and set up progress reporting system with college faculty STEM department launches first annual STEM symposium for whole student body, in effort to celebrate importance of pursuing high-level STEM coursework - targeted outreach is made to students and families identified by Learning Partners team Geometry and Earth Science departments begin curriculum mapping initiative with CUNY Network schools to improve coherence and Regents outcomes School launches AP Computer Science as a 4th year STEM elective School launches fall Robotics elective in conjunction with NYC FIRST Maker Space (Roosevelt Island), and expands current extracurricular robotics programs to include FRC, FTC, and VEX competitions; targeted outreach for these programs is made to students and families identified by Learning Partners team CUNY Tutor Corps tutors push into Algebra and Computer Science classes; tutors are assigned to students and groups identified by baseline assessments Mathematics department, in partnership with external coach, reviews fall '18 outcomes from college mathematics classes; Assistant Principal leads focus groups with students and college faculty; mathematics department makes curricular adjustments School leverages external grants to offer paid stipends to students who have demonstrated strong outcomes in STEM classes as peer tutors STEM teams disaggregate interim assessment data with support of Learning Partners team to identify students and groups who Principal Assistant Principals Teacher members January - April College Liaison All students External Coaches Guidance Counselors Principal 2018-19 CEP 17  are at risk of not passing culminating exams; teams work together to create intervention plans STEM department presents annual Engineers Week program to all students; targeted outreach is made to students and families identified by Learning Partners team STEM department implements mock Regents exams, analyzes data, and plans spring Saturday Academy supports and groupings based on patterns/trends School launches spring Fabrication Science elective in partnership with NYC FIRST Maker Space (Roosevelt Island) School sends teachers to AP Environmental Science and AP Biology training in order to launch high-level STEM offerings in SY 2019-2020 School teams review June 2019 Regents data, fall and spring college data, and student focus groups to make recommendations for next steps Assistant Principals Teacher leaders All students May - June College Liaison External Coaches Guidance Counselors Principal Assistant Principals Teacher leaders College faculty 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to regular STEM events including a fall STEM symposium, spring Engineers Week, FRC/FTC/VEX competitions, etc. At these events, parents will participate in demonstrations and information sessions to learn more about the content/Next Generation Science Standards that students are learning, resources (e.g. Castle Learning, Khan Academy, Code.org, etc.) to support their children, strategies they could use at home, as well as scholarship and postsecondary opportunities. Parent Coordinator will include weekly facts and articles in parent newsletter about the importance of STEM study. School leaders will conduct info sessions at open school nights and SLCs about the importance of taking high-level STEM electives and courses beyond core requirements. Teachers will facilitate workshops for parents during Community Coffee Hours about the expectations of STEM coursework, the school's goals, and the importance of taking four years of college-ready mathematics and science coursework. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Early College Liaison, Model Teachers, 2 Guidance Counselors, STEM departments and leaders Principal, AP, and college faculty (per-session/overtime funds allocated, as well as release time) Instructional resources: Curriculum materials, Rubicon Atlas, online software as needed Schedule adjustments: additional coursework in student schedules for core and elective STEM coursework; after-school/Saturday prep sessions as needed; weekly meeting time for teams Other resources: Title I funds allocated for after-school/Saturday Program; CUNY and grant funds used for curriculum development, meetings with college faculty, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School will review scholarship reports and trackers at the mid-year point to assess student participation and success in STEM coursework at each year. School will conduct student and faculty focus groups to measure success in college coursework and to determine next steps for support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Scholarship Report data (STARS); Regents examinations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The terms “safe, supported, and challenged” happen to be 3 of the 5 core values at our school. When we designed foundational programs and practices for Energy Tech, we brainstormed what it would look like, sound like, and feel like for students and members of our community to be safe, known and valued, challenged and supported, and accountable and empowered. From this set of ideas, our founding team shared the responsibility for the design, implementation, and monitoring of targeted programs and practices, such as our monthly Town Hall meetings, or our conflict resolution model. Periodically, we have, as a staff, come together to reflect upon our progress in these areas, and have made adjustments as needed. We also have 3 trained Respect for All liaisons, 1 full-time guidance counselor, 3 full-time social workers, a parent coordinator, and two additional community workers. Our guidance counselors and social worker are trained in conflict resolution and mediation, and a large team of teachers and other staff members is trained in Restorative Circles and TCIS, which are emerging practices at the school. Additionally, the school has worked with Ramapo for Children and Brain Power, and has provided staff workshops in positive behavior support and mindfulness practices, including full-day team-building and mindfulness retreats. Students also have access to a wide range of extracurricular programming after school, on the weekends, and during the summer. There are opportunities for after-school tutoring 3 days per week, for Saturday academic support, and also optional summer support and enrichment. Approximately 60% of students have participated in Saturday programming, and almost 80% of students have participated in summer programming – the majority of which is optional. Finally, we have developed and continued to refine our in-class and out-of-class tutoring support for students by LaGuardia Community College field work interns, Varsity Tutors, and the Student Government at LaGuardia Community College. In SY 2017-2018, we added CUNY Tutor Corps support in Algebra I classes through Algebra for All, and plan to expand this program into AP Computer Science in SY 2018-2019. Indicator 3.4 was rated Highly Effective in our most recent Quality Review, and was highlighted as an area of celebration. Additionally, Energy Tech launched a Ladder of Referral Committee in Spring 2016 to revisit our existing referral and response protocols, and teachers and other professionals presented weekly professional development sessions aimed to improve staff response to conflicts and other situations. This team reduced lateness referrals from over 100 in one week to less than 20 in the next through a revised lateness protocol. There were only 2 out of school suspensions in 2016-2017. Discipline referrals and suspensions remained low in 2017-2018 - with no students serving a suspension outside of school. Based on our comprehensive review, Energy Tech sent a team of staff members to participate in School Time Lab through NYCDOE in order to explore ways to better make use of time and think about master scheduling creatively to support these and new support initiatives. A new master schedule was created and approved that includes dedicated weekly "community time" for Town Hall assemblies, mentoring sessions, circles, and advisory activities. The schedule also allows for 5 days per week of after-school clubs and tutoring, as well as morning tutoring and lab time two days per week - based on teacher, student, and parent interest. The schedule also allows for extended blocks for deeper learning activities, as well as dedicated time for mathematics and literacy support labs. 2018-19 CEP 20  Finally, we worked with MDRC in Spring 2017, an organization that came into the school to conduct a research project about the efficacy of advisement in shaping students' projected college and career pathways. We additionally collected less formal survey data, and reviewed previous administrations of NYC School Surveys, which indicated a dip in students' confidence in their post-secondary pursuits. Based on that data, Energy Tech focused on supports for students in college classes, seeking to improve college course pass rates and percentages of students in "good academic standing", per college data. Energy Tech worked with College Access for All, and worked to improve postsecondary matching and efforts to track progress and support students after 12th grade. Approximately 95% of Cohort S graduates are currently engaged and in good standing in postsecondary ventures - our Years 5/6 program, CUNY ASAP at LaGuardia, a range of 2- and 4-year college programs, the military, and a competitive career certificate program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will effectively support the social and academic needs of all students, as will be evidenced by a 25% decrease in the number of students being marked "late" to school. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Guidance Team will review SY 2017-2018 attendance data over the summer, calling in students and families for meetings to discuss prior year attendance and goals for 2018-2019 School upgrades automated messenger system and protocols for contacting families of absent/late students Ladder of Referral Team meets to identify a calendar, goals, and preliminary needs for year Grade Team Leaders in consultation with Student Government leaders plan incentive morning events - e.g. morning sports and fitness, morning announcements, incentive breakfast events, etc. Ladder of Referral Team identifies students marked late on daily basis and contacts families to advise of late reflection policies Ladder of Referral Team monitors numbers of students serving in late reflection on a weekly basis Guidance Team implements silent mentoring for students identified as at-risk Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with under 90% attendance and/or excessive lateness in SY 2017-2018 July - August Guidance/SW Team Ladder of Referral Team Assistant Principals Grade Team Leaders All students September - December Guidance Team Ladder of Referral Team Assistant Principals Grade team leaders 2018-19 CEP 22  Guidance Team conducts family meetings for students with 3 or more absences or lateness Ladder of Referral shares attendance data with College and Industry Liaisons for use in vetting process for college class and internship referrals Student Government leaders are tasked with brainstorming high-interest activities and programs as well as classroom-level adjustments to improve student attendance. Ladder of Referral Team conducts mid-year student focus group and staff focus group; team makes updates as necessary All students January - May Ladder of Referral Team Student Government leaders create Perfect Attendance and Honor Roll displays and celebrations Guidance Team makes use of automated wake-up calls for targeted students; plan incentives for targeted students who show growth Student Government leaders plan celebratory events for students who have improved attendance; Attendance Team mails home postcards to families to celebrate improved attendance Assistant Principals Grade Team Leaders SW/Guidance Team All involved staff participate in end-of-year attendance data session to review patterns and trends and plan next steps for coming year All students June Ladder of Referral Team Assistant Principals Grade Team Leaders SW/Guidance Team 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Energy Tech will make use of automated tools to keep parents informed about attendance; Energy Tech will present at PA Meetings and Community Coffee Hours about how attendance impacts referrals to and success in early college coursework and internships - Ladder of Referral Team will present rubric that demonstrates how poor attendance may result in limited early college/internship opportunities; Energy Tech will celebrate excellent attendance in regular newsletters/emails Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional staff dedicated from ETHS team for attendance (e.g. counselors, teacher members, Assistant Principal, etc.); per-session funds available for Ladder of Referral team, Guidance family meetings, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 95% of students will have 5 or fewer latenesses, per ATS data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports generated through ATS; school-level trackers housed in Google Docs; Web Attendance reports from LAGCC Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In considering current practice in this area, we reviewed the NYC School Survey, teacher participation in teams and professional learning opportunities, Quality Review data, team meeting notes, externship notes and data, student achievement data, and other anecdotal information. In the spring 2017 and 2018 NYC School Surveys, a very high percentage of teachers responded favorably about teacher collaboration, citing that teachers and staff work together effectively to plan programs, curriculum, and instruction. This data also revealed that teachers felt trust among staff, that successes were highlighted, and that they felt committed to the school community. The area with the lowest favorable ratings related to professional development, and specifically the time to work with other educators outside of the school and adequate time to fully think through and engage with new ideas. This points to a need to carve out opportunities for school staff to collaborate outside of the school with other educators and to ensure that professional learning and inquiry are deeper and more sustained. All teachers at Energy Tech are programmed for and provided resources to participate in a wide array of teams – content teams, grade teams, Instructional Leadership Team (ILT), School Leadership Team (SLT), School Implementation Team (SIT), administrative cabinet, Technical Skills Subcommittee, Leadership Skills Subcommittee, Recruitment Subcommittee, Planning Team, Restorative Circles Team, etc. The school makes use of its Google Drive to capture meeting notes, work products, and protocols used by each team. The school has also provided, and continues to provide, training in facilitative leadership and team-building opportunities. Teachers in SY 2015-2016 participated in external opportunities through the Affinity Field Support Center, GE Skills Lab/Office of Post-secondary Readiness, School Time Lab, and NYCDOE teacher leadership institutes. In response to survey data in 2017-2018, teachers were grouped in Inquiry Teams, and were offered outside PD through Algebra for All, Computer Science for All, CUNY LINCT, CACNY, College Access for All, Skills Lab, DELS, etc. All of these experiences leveraged improved distributed leadership - participating staff led the overhaul of our master schedule, designed rigorous real-world tasks in collaboration with college and industry partners, documented curriculum on an electronic platform, led professional learning for other teachers in the area of formative assessment, etc. Additionally, the participating teachers built a strong community with teachers and professionals outside of the school, and this professional collaboration elevated practice, as was evidenced in Advance data - something we seek to increase with a new group of teachers in SY 2018-2019. Teachers last year began to deepen their connection with college and industry personnel, and have expressed in their End of Year and Beginning of Year conferences the desire to expand their collaboration with college faculty to better align curriculum and instruction. This work will carry into the coming year. Additionally, content team leaders have expressed the desire to meet more regularly and in a more structured manner in order to improve vertical alignment of curriculum and coherence of team planning. Specifically teachers have expressed interested in increased collaboration with network schools through the lens of curriculum mapping. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration in our school and in the Early College Network will result in a 10% increase in student scores on Earth Science and Geometry Regents examinations. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? External coach will continue to work with Geometry teachers in the development and revision of a curriculum map and materials for Geometry Students in Earth Science and Geometry classes Principals across 4-5 area high schools will collaborate to determine a calendar and a scope for teacher curriculum collaboration Assistant principal and model teachers meet to norm expectations for curriculum design work and develop a rubric for teacher/department use Assistant principals and teacher leaders will disaggregate June 2018 data by subgroup and skill to provide baseline data for department planning; teams will follow progress of targeted subgroups throughout the year in interim assessment analysis Geometry teachers and Earth Science teachers attend 3 sessions outside of the school with other Geometry and Earth Science teachers from across 4-5 network schools - sessions will focus on reviewing Regents data, standards, and developing a common arc of topics, units, and lessons Students in Earth Science and Geometry classes Geometry and Earth Science ICT Teaching pairs will be targeted in the SY 2018-2019 implementation of ICT Lab Site - teachers will be coached by an Assistant Principal, model teachers, and an external coach July - August Geometry and Earth Science teachers Assistant Principal Model Teachers External coach September - December Geometry and Earth Science teachers Assistant Principal Model Teachers External coach 2018-19 CEP 27  Assistant principal or College Liaison connects targeted teachers to college faculty for mathematics and science departments at LaGuardia, specifically gathering feedback on topics that are essential to Topics in Physical Science and the mathematics sequence; teachers make adjustments to maps as appropriate Targeted teachers revise maps with guidance and support of model teachers; teachers implement tasks and look at resulting student work making adjustments to curriculum as appropriate Teachers implement a baseline assessment, disaggregating open-response item data by subgroup and collaboratively creating an action plan to support a target group in this area Teachers implement mock Regents exams in Earth Science and Geometry, looking at resulting data with other network teachers, and collaboratively revising curriculum and writing review materials for spring Students in Earth Science and Geometry classes Extended sessions offered for Geometry and Earth Science for spring Saturday Academy; model teachers support targeted teachers in identifying students, groupings, and lessons Targeted teachers continue to attend sessions with other network teachers January - May Geometry and Earth Science teachers Assistant Principal Model Teachers Targeted teachers present their curriculum mapping project with ILT/whole staff All students June Geometry and Earth Science teachers Implementation on June Regents exams; analysis of data and planning next steps 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principal Model Teachers 2018-19 CEP 28  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Participating teachers will plan workshops for PA meetings and Community Coffee Hours on the content of the Earth Science and Geometry Regents exams as well as how families can support students in preparation; Assistant principal and model teachers to provide workshops to families and info in newsletters about high school and college coursework that demonstrate "college readiness" Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Per-diem allocated and release time for teachers to engage in full-day curriculum planning events outside of school; model teachers funded through Learning Partners Program (LPP) Instructional resources: Rubicon Atlas Curriculum Mapping system; external coaching Schedule adjustments: Release time for teachers; per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, curriculum maps will reflect 75% completion in Rubicon Atlas tool; teachers will implement mock Regents examinations, and data will project at least 5% gains on Regents examinations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Rubicon Atlas; mock Regents data; other classroom assessment data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In engaging in a comprehensive review of the school’s data, school leadership, teachers, parents, and students provided feedback through a variety of methods. We reviewed classroom observation data, feedback from the Quality Review and PPR related to indicators 1.3, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, and 5.1, as well as school survey data and school-generated survey data. Review of all of this data yields information about existing distributed leadership practices, and extensive opportunities for students, parents, and staff to participate in leadership and decision making at the school. Seeking to continue to develop our pipeline of leadership talent, Energy Tech will expand the work of its instructional Learning Team (ILT) in SY 2018-2019. In SY 2017-2018, Energy Tech responded to NYC School Survey and Advance data with a sharp focus on Danielson Indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d through its annual PD plan, fall and spring cycles of inquiry, targeted department teams, and participation in the AFSC Lab Site program. We were able to surpass our goal of improving questioning and discussion techniques and student engagement, as was evidenced by Advance data, but this and other data also points to the need for continued focus in 3d - Assessing Student Learning. The school seeks to improve professional learning and feedback to teachers, and will fund model teacher positions (with the support of the Learning Partners Program) to help facilitate this work - in consultation with Advance data particularly in Domain 3. In addition, the school will continue to support emerging teacher leaders in the planning, delivery, and evaluation of professional learning for all school staff, with a particular focus on equity and diversity in all professional learning plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will deepen teacher practice in the use of formative assessment that leads to effective adjustments in instruction, as evidenced by a .23 increase in the average rating for Danielson's Framework for Teaching 3D: Assessing Student Learning - from 2.77 to 3.0. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and APs will lead ILT members in a group analysis of SY 2017-2018 data (teacher performance and student achievement) ILT members July-September ILT APs Principal Model Teachers Whole staff October - ILT January APs Principal Model Teachers Principal and APs will lead ILT members in goal-setting and action-planning; ILT members will replicate this process in their teams Principal and APs will lead ILT members in close reading of Danielson 3d, as well as analysis of video, norming, low-inference scripting, review of exemplars, etc.; ILT members will replicate this process with 3d and other selected indicators APs will facilitate action planning with ILT and development of the Fall 2018 professional learning calendar and plan ILT will structure weekly inquiry cycle teams focused on varying aspects of assessment; special education and ESL leads will provide monthly sessions focused on SWD and ELL populations/strategies. ILT will facilitate continued cycles of classroom visits with peer feedback Principal and APs will conduct weekly rounds and track progress; follow-up intensives will be provided as needed by Model Teachers Model Teachers will provide extra support in development of teacher skills 2018-19 CEP 31 ILT will continue to provide professional learning and cycles of visits with feedback Whole staff February - May Teams will present out results of fall inquiry work Principal and APs will continue to monitor weekly progress School leaders will plan midyear retreat for ILT, focusing on student achievement data, Advance data, and feedback from intervisitations to plan next steps Whole staff will be invited to a 2-day retreat during Regents week to debrief year's learning, reflect upon SY 2018-2019 data, and participate in the planning of the SY 2019-2020 professional learning plan/calendar. Whole staff June ILT APs Principal Model Teachers ILT APs Principal Model Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will hear from the principal and other school leaders (ILT members, coaches) about the implementation of assessment strategies at both SLT and community coffee hours. School staff will share assessment strategies that are being used in the classroom that parents and family members could support at home. This will also take place at department evening events, which will be led by department teams and leaders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal, APs, ILT members Instructional resources: Cycles of Inquiry tools, Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 32  Schedule adjustments: Team to meet on outside of school hours for planning - per-session activity Other resources: Per-session funds for teachers to work outside of school time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-year point in February, Principal and APs will review teacher growth in targeted Danielson components based on the rubric and classroom visits. By February 2018, at least 85% of staff will demonstrate an average proficiency of over 3.0 in 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching, Advance portal data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing parent involvement data for SY 2013-2014, SY 2014-2015, SY 2015-2016 and SY 2016-2017 Energy Tech reviewed PCAR data, sign-in sheets from PA meetings, open houses, and other events, as well as attendance at workshops. The school also reviewed parent and family contact logs, Skedula data, attendance from Community Coffee Hours, etc. The school made note of the fact that there was 75-100% attendance at events involving student progress, such as parent-teacher conferences. Parent contact with the school was frequent regarding student grades, particularly through the use of the online grade book tool. The school reflected upon NYC school survey data and anecdotal feedback to take steps to improve community-wide communication and access to activities and events, and to plan a series of high-interest ways in which families can play a more active role in day-to-day life at Energy Tech. Some of these included Community Coffee Hours, family workshops, Winterfest, a Spring Awards Night, a family dessert social, etc. Substantial gains were noted in parent activities, and a large number of parents were engaged in Teacher Appreciation Week, social events, Spring 2016 and 2017 PA meetings, and our inaugural Parent Appreciation Night was the best-attended event yet - with over 30 families coming in for a light dinner, celebratory remarks, and updates about the coming school year. At events attended by college and industry partners, we achieved almost 50% parent attendance. Most recent survey showed that 88% of parents responded favorably related to outreach efforts, while only 83% responded favorably to items related to more active parent involvement in school (e.g. through volunteer opportunities). Feedback on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey showed overall family satisfaction with the program, but limited opportunities to attend events showcasing student work/projects - something we hope to improve in the coming year. Looking ahead, we aim to improve our community ties - to better make use of community resources to provide our students with the career-readiness experiences that they will need to leverage them for successful post-high school pursuits. We also seek to bolster these connections to build a strong workforce for our local industries. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, we will deepen our home-school partnership, as evidenced by a 25% increase in family participation in school events focused on student work/performance, which will also be reflected in NYC School Survey responses. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School acquires print copies of Course of Study books, Year-at-a-Glance checklist cards to distribute and use with students and families School conducts first "expanded" Summer Bridge Program for incoming 9th grade students and families SLT meets to plan scope of work for the year Summer Bridge Team pilots Course of Study materials with 9th grade students and families All families and students; incoming 9th graders      July - August 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Industry Liaison AmeriCorps VISTA Parent Coordinator Counselor Lead Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Industry Liaison AmeriCorps VISTA Parent Coordinator Counselor Grade Team Leaders Parent Leaders All students and families September - December 2018  Grade Team Leaders, counselors, and career services team members meet as a group to re-map Community Time for all grades, incorporated Course of Study materials and information about an updated 6-year College and Career Foundations sequence  Grade Team Leaders roll out new Community Time curriculum with all teachers and students  Grade Team Leaders plan a series of "Grade Parent Nights" to review year-by-year expectations and various complex elements of our 9-14 model; Grade Team Leaders recruit a small team of "Grade Parents" for each grade School implements a fall baseline survey with all families to measure how well the school communicates the model and expectations for students   Course of Study is rolled out with families during Community Coffee Hour and PA meetings as well; guests from partnerships are invited to speak at these events about the school model and opportunities for students  Department Team Leaders organize and present at least one "Department Evening", which will include student work showcases and seminars/workshops to share strategies and information that families can use to support students at home by subject All students and families January - March 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 35  Grade Team Leaders finalize curriculum map of Community Time lessons and topics  Course of Study is used with families during Community Coffee Hour and PA meetings; guests from partnerships are invited to speak at these events about the school model and opportunities for students    School gathers parent participation data and compares against prior year School conducts an end-of-year survey for families about how well the school has communicated the model and expectations for students during the second semester School convenes a focus group comprised of staff, students, and parents to reflect on: SLCs, advisement services, Course of Study, Community Time, and family events. Group will reflect on the work of the year and give recommendations for the upcoming summer and school year. Industry Liaison AmeriCorps VISTA Parent Coordinator Counselor Grade Team Leaders Department Team Leaders Parent Leaders families April - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Industry Liaison AmeriCorps VISTA Parent Coordinator Counselor Teacher Team Leaders Student leaders Parent leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Western Queens Consultation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Parent Coordinator, APs, Grade Team Leaders, Department Leaders, Guidance Team, Culture, Intervention, Subcommittees, ECL/IL, etc. Schedule adjustment: planning time for teams Financial: per-session for events and event planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 36  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, at least 60% of parents will have attended at least one school event that showcases student work by discipline, as will be measured by PCAR reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ilogs, attendance sheets, RSVPs, PCAR reports, and feedback surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● 8 th grade tests ● Baseline tests (e.g. NYCPA) ● Marking period grades ● Grade Team recommendation ● Parent/student request Mathematics ● 8 th grade tests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Push-in and co-teaching services ● small group – in class include parallel teaching, station ● small group – out of class teaching, small-group instruction, pre-teaching ● individual after-school of vocabulary, use of ● online ● before school ● after school ● in class ● Saturday scaffolded graphic organizers, etc. There are also opportunities for small skill-alike pull-out groups during extended literacy and math blocks. ETHSmakes use of student teachers, TAs, and CUNYTutor Corps members to provide more support. Some online interventions are available through Castle Learning, Google Classroom, etc. Co-teaching services are available in mathematics, utilizing a number of ● small group – in class ● before school 2018-19 CEP 38  Science ● Baseline tests (e.g. NYCPA) ● diagnostic and benchmark tasks ● Marking period grades ● Grade Team recommendation ● Parent/student request ● small group – out of class ● after school ● in class ● Saturday ● individual after-school ● online ● small group – in class ● small group – out of class ● individual after-school ● before school ● after school ● in class ● Saturday ● online different co-teaching models. In-class supports include a variety of guided notes, graphic organizers, tiered problems, group tasks, and use of manipulatives and visual reinforcements (e.g. Khan Academy, screencasts, etc.). CUNY Tutor Corps members and TAsmay provide in-class small-group support. Math department also makes use of programs like Castle Learning, Kahoot, and Quizlet provide online support and to gather student data. Co-teaching is available, and supports include a variety of co-teaching models. Course is co-planned to include a range of literacy supports, particularly focusing on building academic vocabulary and analyzing documents and texts. Extensive use of leveled texts, graphic organizers, collaborative learning, and study skills are planned into classroom instruction as well as out-of-class tutoring. Saturday support classes are offered. Test prep books and materials are provided. 2018-19 CEP 39 ● small group – in class ● small group – out of class ● individual after-school ● before school ● after school ● in class ● Saturday ● online ● small group ● before school ● individual ● after school ● out-of-school referrals ● Restorative Circles ● mediation ● in class ● Saturday ● lunch time Social Studies ● Prior year ELA ● Baseline tests (e.g. NYCPA) ● Marking period grades ● Grade Team recommendation ● Parent/student request At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ●Discipline referrals ● Parent/student requests ● Grade Team referrals ● Marking period data Co-teaching is available, and supports include a variety of co-teaching models. Course is co-planned to include a range of literacy supports, particularly focusing on building academic vocabulary and analyzing documents and texts. Extensive use of leveled texts, graphic organizers, collaborative learning, and study skills are planned into classroom instruction as well as out-of-class tutoring. Saturday support classes are offered, and additionally teachers make use of extensive online tools through Google Classroom and Castle Learning to support. Guidance Counselor and Social Worker offer counseling for groups and individuals during and after school as part of mandated and at-risk services. Emergency mediation is provided, using research-based conflict de-escalation strategies. School staff is trained in Restorative Circles, which are used regularly in counseling and advisory settings. Students are also referred for outside services with CBOs or 2018-19 CEP 40  are referred to tutoring, clubs, and activities through the guidance and social work team. Mentoring and advisement are also available. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide school supplies, dress code, emergency hygiene supplies, and additional supplemental academic items (e.g. workbooks, manipulatives, calculators, etc.) to our STH population. We also coordinate services with CBOs and make referrals to agencies, counseling, etc. as needed. We frequently coordinate services with Western Queens Consultation, our in-school clinic. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 42  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In recruiting teachers and other staff for Energy Tech High School, advertisements were posted through the Department of Education New Teacher Finder and other portals, through high-traffic external sites, through the CUNY schools of Education, through high-performing teacher preparation programs (e.g. Math for America, Teaching Fellows, Columbia University, etc.), and through a network of experienced education professionals. In subsequent years, Energy Tech will continue to recruit through these avenues, and additionally through college and industry partnerships. Students and teachers participate in the interviewing process for new staff to ensure the best fit for our community. Leadership and team facilitation opportunities are presented to staff in order to better distribute leadership responsibilities, and also to develop and strengthen a pipeline of supervisory capacity at Energy Tech. Teachers are sent out on a monthly or quarterly basis for professional learning, particularly in the areas of facilitative leadership. Teachers participate in a monthly CUNY-run leadership institute, as well as a number of content-specific series of workshops. In-house professional development happens in content and grade teams, in Instructional Leadership Team, during contracted training times, etc. Teachers have access to college and industry professionals for ongoing collaboration about curriculum and instruction. The school makes use of an Assistant Principal, three part-time mentors, and other school staff (e.g. CUNY SSO staff, Early College Liaison, Early College Program Associate, Community Associate, Industry Liaison, etc.) to develop instructional, leadership, and 9-14 model capacity. Teachers and other staff are periodically engaged in industry activities, such as site visits and participation on steering and sub-committees, on a regular basis. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school program allocates time for daily and weekly team meetings for staff, as well as Tuesday and Thursday after-school professional learning. Grade teams meet once per week and focus on individual studies and interdisciplinary issues. Content teams meet daily or weekly and focus on collaborative planning and looking at student work. The school program also makes time for weekly Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) meetings to drive targeted professional development and inquiry around student data. This will support leadership development and coaching capacity for teams and teachers at Energy Tech. The school also includes time for periodic Humanities and 2018-19 CEP 44  STEM teams, which are focused on activities such as academic vocabulary strategies and STEM argument rubrics. There are a number of opportunities to visit other teachers, and to participate in network and other out-of-school learning including ICT Lab Site program through AFSC, Shakespeare Festival, Research in Science Education (RISE), UDL, facilitative leadership, sustainability practices, college and career curriculum development, CTE topics, etc. The principal attends monthly professional development facilitated by CUNY PSO, periodic professional learning focused on CTE, 9-14, and early college schools, as well as a Critical Friends Group (CFG) comprised of other principals. The principal also participates on a quarterly President’s Cabinet at the partner college. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are engaged in SLT, in Grade Teams, in Department Teams, and in instructional leadership teams. At the onset of the year, teacher leaders work closely with departments and with administration to determine appropriate benchmark assessments. Teacher leads meet weekly with administration to engage in action research and to plan professional learning for the greater staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 45  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $209,956 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local $4,186.452 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 46  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Energy Tech in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Energy Tech will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Energy Tech in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP 50  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 52  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Energy Tech High School Borough Queens School Number 258 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Hope Barter Coach Bethany Antonelli ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ashley Butler Teacher/Subject Area Matthew Flood Teacher/Subject Area Maria Quintanilla Related-Service Provider Stephanie Frank Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Antonette Bartelucci Coach N/A School Counselor Yanique Powell Parent Josette Murray Parent Coordinator Sara Mohamed Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 511 2018-19 CEP 55 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.72%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Energy Tech makes use of Achieve3000, Wilson intake assessments, teacher-created and MOSL baselines, and the Woodcock Munoz program to assess early literacy skills of ELLs. The preponderance of the data reflects that ELLs students are reading below level - between 3 rd and 9 th grade levels. Baseline reading and writing tasks reflect that students are able to formulate claims and use evidence to support these claims on a basic level. However patterns of weakness in writing center around counterclaims, organization, and writing conventions. ELL students at the transitional and emerging levels demonstrate some difficulties in the areas of syntax, grammar, and academic vocabulary. The study of this data informs the focus areas for opening units of the school year, and guidance around specific approaches to support in English Language Arts as well as stand-alone ESL classes. For example, it has guided the level of texts chosen for these classes, strategies for reading above-level texts in ELA and content area questions (e.g. recall and text-dependent questions, strategies for finding word meaning in context, previewing new vocabulary, etc.). Data has also informed the content for an after-school supplemental 2018-19 CEP 56 program, as well as the acquisition of additional materials (e.g. listening centers, iPads, supplemental literacy and mathematics online programs, dictionaries and thesauri, leveled libraries, graphic novels, etc.). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ESL and Special Education teachers meet in an "Access Team" once per week to participate in team-level professional learning, analysis of student work, discussion of strategies for groups/specific students, etc. A Special Education Coach additionally represents this team of teachers on the school's Data Study Team. The ESL teacher is assigned to the school's Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) to ensure that ELL topics and strategies are woven into the annual PD plan. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review a number of data when we consider the success and efficacy of our school's ELL programs including but not limited to student attendance, credit accumulation, scholarship reports, performance on NYSESLAT, performance on Regents Examinations, etc. We review AYP based on the state targets - the percentage of students who advance a level on the NYSESLAT, and the percentage of students who achieve proficiency based on this examination. We use the AMAO tool to track students who have met these goals, as well as students who meet other criteria that we use to define success - attendance, credit accumulation, school performance, Regents performance, progress to graduation, etc. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have made use of flexible scheduling, such as reprogramming students at the midyear point after Regents and midterms to allow for small reading and AIS groups, and have reviewed student outcomes to reprogram ESL teachers into classes where students have demonstrated more need (e.g. pushing an ESL teacher into a science class instead of a history class). We have a Data Study Team and Access Team that review data and provide recommendations, and a Special Education Coach participates in the Programming Committee to ensure that appropriate interventions are scheduled. We also set aside per-session funds for after-school and Saturday Academy small-group work for ELLs based on their data in preparation for high stakes exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. During the most recent administration of the NYSESLAT for which we have data, 7 out of our 11 eligible ELLs performed at the commanding level for all 4 categories - listening, speaking, reading, and writing. 10 of the 11 students performed at the commanding level for speaking and writing, and 8 of the 11 students performed at the commanding level for listening. The lowest performance category was reading, with only 7 of the 11 students meeting the commanding score in this area. Additionally, 75% of our current Long Term ELLs (LTEs) are also students with disabilities. The greatest gains on the NYSESLAT in the most recent administration were seen in our Newcomer population, with 2 "Beginners" moving to "Expanding" and 1 "Intermediate" student moving to "Expanding" after one year of service at our school. We additionally utilize Regents data to evaluate and inform ELL programs. 3+ ELLs over the past two years have demonstrated proficiency through high performance on the NYS Common Core English Regents examination. Our ELLs participate in a full range of Regents coursework, and we track all of these outcomes annually and use the trends to make recommendations for where an ESL teacher would best serve students in a push-in setting in Regents courses. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Data Study Team and ILT include ESL personnel, as does our Programming Committee. These teams review data and use it to make programmatic recommendations and to disseminate information to the appropriate teaching staff and administration. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs at Energy Tech High School are grouped by grade and travel together for the majority of the school day and are provided with integrated support in content classes and stand-alone classes as needed. In the ninth and tenth grade, ELLs are supported in their ELA, science, and history classes, and in the 11 th and 12th grades an ESL teacher supports students in core classes as well as in stand-alone classes. For the ELLs who are between transitioning and expanding, integrated ENL support is provided. For the ELLs who fall between entering and emerging additional stand-alone ENL class is implemented. Therefore, students are grouped in mixed proficiency levels, with some students receiving additional service based on their individual needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ninth and tenth grade ELLs who fall between intermediate and expanding are supported in an integradted ENL setting in their respective coreclasses. An ESL teacher supports these students five days per week for 45 minutes, which exceeds the number of required minutes per CR Part 154.2. In the upper grades, students are supported in their core classes by an ESL teacher five days a week for 45 minutes. For students who are entering and emerging, additional standalone ENL minutes are provided. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In each of these classes the units are designed to ensure alignment with the the Common Core Learning Standards. In ELA, targeted main standards that are emphasized include writing strong claims and distinguishing between counterclaims, supporting their ideas with textual evidence, and providing an in-depth analysis, as well as explaining how an author develops their central theme. In order to facilitate language development, students are given multiple entry points including small groupings, one-on-one support, visual and auditory aids. In regards to language approaches, time is devoted to building vocabulary and providing sentence structures. Texts are chunked, translated, and glossaries are provided to promote reading comprehension. Sentence starters, sentence frames, as well as graphic organizers are provided to encourage and foster writing skills. Students participate in small group intellectual discussions where high expectations are established for students to both actively speak and listen. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As appropriate, home language exams are offered during Regents administrations, and the Woodcock Munoz is additionally available for students in Spanish language. In 11 th grade, Spanish-speaking ELLs are additionally programmed for Spanish language coursework, and the school is launching AP Spanish to better serve native speakers in the 2017 school year. A Spanish teacher groups students who are heritage/native speakers into specific sections for additional home language support. 2018-19 CEP 58  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status First, Energy Tech programs students in each subgroup for the appropriate allocation of integrated and stand-alone supports. In addition, Energy Tech will offer supplemental services for SIFE students who may require additional transitional support and focus on content. Newcomer students have been and will continue to be accommodated with home language support - some of these supports include translations of readings and assignments, use of home language dictionary as well as technology such as iPads, and additional supplemental after-school programming. Long Term ELLs are being tracked closely in this school year through the focus of a monthly Literacy Team, in tandem with a focus on ELL-SWD students - who comprise the majority of our Long Term ELL population. Teachers of these students have additional time for co-planning and flexibility for push-in/pull-out services. Finally, Former ELLs continue to receive push-in supported in integrated classes by an ESL teacher, and continue to be extended offers to participate in the after-school supplemental program and other ESL enrichment activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs have weekly collaboration time, and are represented on a weekly Access Team and a monthly Literacy Team. Teachers use shared tools such as grade-level curriculum - which is documented in the school's Google Drive and Rubicon Atlas and shared among all teachers - and tools like Achieve3000 that track reading progress. Teachers collaborate to share strategies for this group of students, which include the use of leveled texts, the use of technology such as iPads for language apps and translation, small-group pull-out sessions, etc. Teachers track progress using the same rubrics which are aligned to the Common Core Standards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school makes use of extensive push-in (integrated) services in content areas such as English Language Arts and the literacy-intensive science courses that ELL-SWD students take. ESL teachers are included in the IEP planning process, and participate in grade and content teams to collect anecdotal and quantitative data about progress. The school allows for flexibility in teacher programs by reducing the caseload of special education and ESL staff. This allows teachers to push in to provide support to ELL-SWD students and pull individuals and groups for Achieve3000 and Wilson as needed during electives. The school also has added a stand-alone ENL class while other students take electives in order to maximize literacy development for this population of students. Finally, the school self-funds an after school supplemental program to support students with homework, language development, and rigorous content-area coursework. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for all students - including SWD and ELL students - stem from study of periodic assessments in ELA, math, and other core content areas. Any student who falls below standards on periodic assessments and mock Regents examinations are offered supplemental tutoring support after school, on Saturdays, and during non-instructional time during Regents Weeks. In addition, Energy Tech has targeted all ESL students in grades 9-11 for additional Achieve3000 support, and has administered Wilson baseline assessments and offers support to qualifying students. All ELL students also have access to online programs for mathematics support, and we prioritize ESL classes for in-class tutoring supports offered through LaGuardia Community College. These are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will, based on data, expand opportunities for after-school supplemental supports, and will offer extended integrated ENL in content area subjects - specifically in science, which has presented a trend in our school Regents data. We will offer 2018-19 CEP 59  additional co-planning time between ESL and special education teachers, and a revised contractual professional learning program for teachers. On the second week of each learning cycle, ESL and special education teachers will present the cycle topic through the lens of Universal Design for Learning and will present a series of strategies to provide access for ELL and SWD students (e.g. when focusing on complex texts, teachers may present strategies such as close reading, pre-teaching of key vocabulary, use of translation tools, guided reading circles, etc.). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are welcomed and encouraged to participate in multiple after-school programs and clubs including community service, anime, art, robotics, Science Olympiad, computer programming, Shakespeare/theater, and various sports. There is an additional after-school ESL enrichment club offering homework help/tutoring, cultural celebrations, and supplemental trips. ELLs are offered additional support through our state grant with Liberty Partnership at LaGuardia Community College after school, on weekends, and in the summer. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teacher-created curriculum - derived from Common Core - is used for all learners to Energy Tech to ensure that all students have access to a rigorous college- and career- prep program. Teams use instructional strategies and supports to give learners access - such as glossing texts or conducting small-groups to building prior knowledge. In addition, teachers give students access to dictionaries and iPads to support with translation for Newcomers. Teachers also make use of Achieve3000 and online math programs to provide content area tutorials and extended practice. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered in a transitional manner within our ENL program. For example, Newcomer students are afforded opportunities early in their year for translation of materials as needed. For example, Newcomer students are offered technology such as iPads pre-loaded with translation and language apps. Also, bilingual staff members have provided translation of assignments and readings as needed as students transition into an immersive ENL environment. Over time, these scaffolds are removed as students acquire more target language skills. In the after-school supplemental program, students are encouraged to use home language to support one another, and technology is available for translation as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ESL coordinator works with school leaders over the summer for incoming 9 th grade programs and the development of upper-class programs, as well as on an ongoing basis for new admits. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teacher-created curriculum - derived from Common Core - is used for all learners to Energy Tech to ensure that all students have access to a rigorous college- and career- prep program. Teams use instructional strategies and supports to give learners access - such as glossing texts or conducting small-groups to building prior knowledge. In addition, teachers give students access to dictionaries and iPads to support with translation for Newcomers. Teachers also make use of Achieve3000 and ALEKS to provide content area tutorials and extended practice. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to our summer orientation for incoming students - both 9 th graders and students entering in upperclass grades. This includes an evening family orientation and a daytime student orientation. School counselors, social worker, ESL coordinator, SWD coordinator, teachers, Parent Coordinator, College Liaison, Industry Liaison, and school leaders 2018-19 CEP 60  are involved in these events - which are designed to welcome, review key policies, collect baseline data, and build community. Additionally, ESL and SWD coordinators invite families in for individual meetings to plan programs and acclimate students to our program. Incoming students are offered a summer math bridge to prepare for a rigorous 9 th grade math class - this is offered through CUNYStart and Early College Initaitive. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Spanish, and are in planning to offer additional languages and Native Language Arts through our partner, LaGuardia Community College. We additionally offer freestanding ENL literacy classes to developing students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel participate in periodic professional development through OELL and through a program at Teachers College/Columbia University. Additionally, ESL staff participate in monthly compliance workshops, and are responsible for the turnkey of this information to all staff. Our professional learning cycles of inquiry allow for monthly focus on making rigorous content and skills attainable for all learners. ESL and SWD coordinators are responsible for the planning of a monthly training with a focus on strategies and scaffolds for ELLs and SWDs for the whole staff. ESL teachers participate in workshops through OELL and Columbia University. Teachers have in the past participate in brain research seminars, STEM supports for ELLs, and trainings about Common Core mathematics and ELLs. Based on teacher/student needs and offerings, a new plan is created each year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Incoming 9 th grade ELLs are provided with summer orientation, after-school supplemental supports and tutoring, Saturday Regents Academy, and additionally a summer bridge for mathematics. In this school year, we will also expand our summer program into literacy. School makes use of a bilingual guidance counselor (Spanish) and a bilingual social worker (Cantonese), as well as a trilingual SWD coordinator (Spanish and Farsi) and a bilingual ESL coordinator (Bengali) to provide counseling and guidance as needed. 25% of professional learning offered is devoted to supports for ELLs and SWD populations. Energy Tech provides professional learning through monthly cycles of inquiry. The second Monday of each month is devoted to this focus area, and is coordinated through a Professional Learning Team - of which the ESL and SWD coordinators are members. Records will be kept in the school's Google Drive (e.g. agendas/materials), and logs will be maintained by the ESL coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 61  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ESL coordinator will provide an annual meeting - in addition to beginning of year meetings - to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency results, etc. These will be conducted during January Regents week, and the ESL coordinator will work with in-school interpreters as well as NYCDOE services to provide translation and interpretation as needed. Logs will be maintained by ESL coordinator - for phone/e-mail outreach, copies of letters, and sign-ins (see below #2). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer monthly Community Coffee Hours with translation available, which are an informal opportunity to come into the building to learn more about our programs and discuss student progress. We also send home newsletters and weekly e-mails, and post information in multiple languages on social media. We will be hiring a new Parent Coordinator this year, and will be adding an additional Spanish language monthly parent meeting, as approximately 30% of families are Spanish-speaking. Finally, we offer annual family potluck events, at which families are encouraged to share dishes from their cultures, as well as an annual Culture Night during Respect for All Week. At Culture Night, students and families share information and presentations about their home countries, cultures, languages, foods, etc. This is widely publicized and attended. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Energy Tech is an early college and career high school serving students in grades 9-14. Over the course of our 6-year program, students have the opportunity to earn a high school diploma, an associates degree - free of cost - through our partner college, and a range of career readiness experiences and credentials aligned with the growing fields of energy and engineering. Our students begin taking college coursework as early as 10 th grade, and over time complete both high school and college classes while still a high school student. In addition, students are afforded the opportunity to participate in full-day site visits to workplaces, to engage in job shadowing and networking experiences, and also to participate in internships and other intensive career-ready programs. Building students' proficiency in speaking, listening, reading, and writing is critical to all students in our program, as we are preparing them for an early entry into the worlds of college and work. Accordingly, we provided added opportunities for ELL students to serve as Class and School Ambassadors in order to bolster essential speaking and listening skills. We also provide a range of high-interest supplemental services to support students' language development in rigorous college-ready coursework. Some of these include a Shakespeare Club sponsored by Early College Initiative and the CUNY Creative Arts team to support students' understanding of complex Shakespearean works. Through this program, a teaching artist from CUNY CAT collaborates with an ESL teacher for our after-school supplemental ESL program and guides students through the fundamentals of Shakespeare and activing, culminating in a student performance at the NYC Shakespeare Festival. Students also have access to mathematics supplemental online programs in the after-school ESL program, as well as additional Achieve3000 programming. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Hope Barter, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Energy Tech High School School DBN: 30Q258 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Hope Barter Title Principal Antonette Bartelucci Assistant Principal Sara Mohamed Parent Coordinator Ashley Butler ENL/Bilingual Teacher Josette Murray Parent Matthew Flood Teacher/Subject Area Maria Quintanilla Teacher/Subject Area Bethany Antonelli Coach Coach Yanique Powell School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Natalia Alvarez Other School Secretary Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q258 School Name: Energy Tech High School Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ashley Butler ENL Teacher NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the onset of each school year, home languages for our parent community - both written and oral communication - is culled from survey data housed in ATS. Additionally, we collect emergency contact information and surveys about parent communication preferences, which are then stored in a master Excel file by our Parent Coordinator and community team. The main office maintains a master file - including relevant ATS printouts - which are used for the purposes of requesting translations and interpretation, ordering translated forms, etc. This information also filters into Skedula, which is used by teachers for outreach to parents. Eligible students and families are administered the HLIS, and are identified through ATS reports to track missing home languages. Finally, we use the RAPL/RCPL information from ATS to identify and utilize parents' home languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Armenian Arabic Bengali Chinese - ANY Cantonese Dutch French Hindi Korean Mandarin Nepali English Pilipino/Tagalog Punjabi Polish Russian Spanish Thai Tibetan Turkish Urdu Ukrainian 2 12 12 9 0 3 1 6 4 0 3 455 1 10 3 1 256 2 5 1 1 1 .25 1.52 1.52 1.14 0 .38 .13 .76 .51 0 .38 57.74 .13 1.27 .38 .13 32.49 .25 .63 .13 .13 .13 2 12 12 6 2 3 1 6 4 3 3 453 1 10 3 1 257 2 5 1 0 1 .25 1.52 1.52 .76 .25 .38 .13 .76 .51 .38 .38 57.49 .13 1.27 .38 .13 32.61 .25 .63 .13 0 .13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 66  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families PA Meeting Notices, lunch forms, opt-out letters (military, CAP), consent forms August, September 7-8 PA Weekly Announcements Every Friday Course Syllabi September 7-8 Contact Information Sheets September 7-8 PupilPath Invites September 7-8 Monthly Newsletters Once per month School Memos As needed College Applications ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We download pre-translated versions of forms, ask teachers to translate as needed, and work with DOE translation for items that we create and do not have in-house language for. Utilize bilingual staff and DOE translation services Utilize bilingual staff and DOE translation services Utilize bilingual staff and DOE translation services Automatically generated in selected home languages Utilize DOE translation services; teacher translators Download pre-translated forms; request DOE translation Request DOE translation; teacher-provided translation 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Nights and special events Sept, Nov, Mar, May, and ongoing Student Led Conf Sept, Nov, Mar, May PA Meetings Monthly Open House Events Fall, Winter interpretation service(s)? We make use of staff who speak Spanish, Arabic, Hindi, Bengali, Urdu, Turkish, Ukrainian, Russian, Cantonese, Mandarin, etc. In addition to the above, we use over-the-phone services. In addition to the above, we utilize parent volunteers. In addition to the above, we utilize Student Ambassadors over the age of 18. 2018-19 CEP 67  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Energy Tech makes use of an automated phone call/e-mail service, as well as PupilPath, which allow users to set their own preferred language. Energy Tech also employs several bilingual staff members who are available for phone calling, emailing, and updating of social media accounts. Energy Tech also makes extensive use of DOE-provided over-the-phone and print translation/interpretation services. When needed, Energy Tech also occasionally makes use of translation service through our partner, LaGuardia Community College. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Energy Tech will include CR A-663 in opening day training for all school staff, and will enlist the support of the Translation and Interpretation Unit for additional training for Parent Coordinator, Secretary, and other office staff. Energy Tech will update its Google Drive folder with all parent language preferences, along with over-the-phone and print translation protocols and "How To" guides. Energy Tech will additionally make available bilingual school staff and will make available offices with external phone lines for all parent meetings that require translation/interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Energy Tech will provide all parents with the parents' Bill of Rights in the appropriate languages. Energy Tech prominently displays multiple signs in the hallways, by the security desk, and in the main office about translation and interpretation services, including those created by the New York City Department of Education and additionally information provided by the school about on-site interpretation available through school staff. There are signs at the main desk allowing parents to point to languages so that the school may procure an in-person or over-the-phone translator. Translations of important policies, announcements, and school calendars are available at the entrance to our school facility. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Energy Tech will solicit feedback from parents through feedback forms at events such as parent meetings, special events, Community Coffee Hours, etc. Energy Tech will also implement a mid-year survey in February, which will be 2018-19 CEP 68  sent and collected electronically to all families. One component of the survey will be a series of questions related to the quality and availability of services, as well as suggestions for next steps to improve access. 2018-19 CEP 69 
