2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q263 School Name: FLUSHING INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: LARA EVANGELISTA 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The Flushing International 342500011263 School Number (DBN): 25Q263 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 144-80 Barclay Ave Flushing, NY 11355 Phone Number: 718-463-2348 Fax: 718-463-3514 School Contact Person: YyiYang Email Address: yyang6@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Lara Evangelista MarlynClaro YensyArevalo 1 Lara Evangelista YensiArevalo 1 Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Santiago Pinzon SunainaRao District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent’s Office Address: 335 Adams St, Rm 508 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Email Address: kpelles@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-923-5181 Fax: 718-923-5145 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Affinity Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax: 718-935-5941 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lara Evangelista MarlynClaro YensyArevalo Ronald Chiang Santiago Pinzon SunainaRao Lily Welsh Adam Forman YensyArevalo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Elected Teacher Member/ Elected Teacher Member/ Elected parent 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AijinLi Wilson Crespo Member/ Elected parent Member/ Elected parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to serve recent immigrants to the United States who are new learners of English to help them learn to read, write and communicate clearly in English while maintaining their native language. They will learn to use their minds well to think about real-world issues. they will use what they learn to become successful in school as well as in the workplace, and they will learn to speak up for themselves and their community. 2018-19 CEP 8  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Flushing International High School) is a small high school that exclusively serves ELLs who are recently arrived immigrants from over 40 countries and speak 20 different languages. FIHS has 440 students in grades 9 to 12, all of whom are scoring at the beginner to intermediate levels on the NYSITELL when they begin with us. Eighty-seven percent of our students are eligible for free lunch. Twenty-five percent of our students are over-age and under-credited and about 20% are SIFE. Our student body is approximately 53% Asian and 42% Hispanic, 2% Black and 3% White. (School Quality Guide) As per the 2016-17 school dashboard, the college readiness is 31%. This is always a challenge for us because our students are older new arrivals and have only a couple of years to become college-ready in English. Our instructional focus this year on Student discussions and student voice we hope will help to address this challenge. As a member school of the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS), the school follows a pedagogical model to support the needs of ELLs. The school is organized around five principles: ● Heterogeneity and collaboration. Our students work in mixed-ability groups, and 9th and 10th grade classes are combined. Students have meaningful opportunities to read, write, speak and hear English across the curriculum. ● Experiential learning. Instructional units, which are thematically and interdisciplinary aligned, are organized around the completion of projects. Project-based learning gives students the opportunity to engage in authentic language tasks and take ownership of their learning. ● Language and content integration. To support the needs of our ELL population, all of our classes teach ENL and content. Units are both vertically aligned by grade level and planned on an interdisciplinary basis. ● Localized autonomy. FIHS teachers work in teams to plan, write, and reflect on curriculum that meets the needs of our student population. Teachers are empowered to make choices to design a curriculum that meets the needs of ELLs, promotes student engagement and academic rigor, and is relevant to the academic and backgrounds of students. In addition, teachers take significant leadership roles and “wear many hats.” The leaders of each instructional team and discipline (content area) team meet weekly with other school leaders as the coordinating council, and this way all teachers have a voice in school policy decisions. This has promoted a culture of trust, collaboration, shared accountability, and continuous leadership. ● One learning model for all. As we ask our students to work collaboratively in teams, teachers also work collaboratively in teams. As our students complete a portfolio, our teachers also complete a portfolio. \ FIHS is also a DOE PROSE school, a Learning Partner's host school, a Restorative Justice Mentor School and a Living Lab school for the Mastery Collaborative. Our school has a waiver from the State Department of Education. In lieu of the social studies and science Regents exams, students must complete graduation portfolios in English, Science, Social Studies, Math, and Native Language. Students are graded according to a rubric jointly developed with other pilot schools. Over the past 4 years, FIHS is supporting extensive professional development both in school and outside of school to support teachers in understanding the rubric as well as in mentoring and supporting students so that they can do graduation-worthy work in all content areas. Our PROSE status around flexible scheduling is helping us to support this work. Because our school serves a high-needs population, we provide our students with additional academic and social support so that they can graduate college-ready within four years. Our school has a strong after-school program, before-school academic support, Saturday programs, and an Internship program for all students. This year we have become a Community School as part of the 21st Century Schools grant. This will help us to provide more supports for 2018-19 CEP 9  students We also work closely with outside organizations like CARA for college access work with our students and Queens College where students can take college classes. In addition, we have an advisory program and have worked closely with the Morningside Center to implement restorative practices in our school. These high levels of support explain the results that our school has achieved, despite a challenging student population. We have consistently had a four-year graduation rate of between 60 and 70%, which is over double the city rate for ELLs, and on our most recent school quality guide we have been exceeding the target both in terms of our school environment and in closing the achievement gap. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We work exclusively with ELLs and many of the students are Students with interrupted or limited formal education (SLIFE). Over 20% of our graduation cohort are unaccompanied minors. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, our school made significant progress in Rigorous Instruction. We are still working on the transition to the use of graduation portfolio projects in lieu of certain Regents exams so that we have tasks in each grade level that are aligned or could be developed into a graduation task. This shift 4 years ago led to our instructional focus on using questions and the revision process to engage students in inquiry, research and graduation-worthy projects. The next year our students were engaged in much more rigorous tasks that were aligned to a common rubric and the CCLS so we focused on supporting students in revision and implementing feedback. Through this work, we discovered that reading skills were a critical aspect of this work and the teaching of reading skills and strategies is not an area that our teachers have been trained in. Then we needed to deepen this work and focused on differentiation in these areas so that we are meeting the needs of all students and challenging them at their level. As a result our tasks have become much more developed. Our next step is to focus on student voice and discussion. We know that this will help students to get a better understanding of the work in their classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q263 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 442 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 85.7% % Reduced Lunch 79.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 46.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 65% 0% 57.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 1 N/A 4 88.5% 5.0% 2.0% 0.9% 47.5% 1.1% 2 11% 3.5 N/A N/A 82% 0% 76.6% 20% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A NO NO 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All of our students are ELLs or former ELLs. In addition, part of our school population is SIFE or has literacy gaps, and these students need additional support. We follow the Internationals model and the 5 key tenets of the model in order to support our students. Because of the specific needs of our population, curriculum is teacher- created and based on the needs of our students. Through extensive collaboration, teachers work together to develop curriculum that develops language and content knowledge, provides multiple entry points and asks students to think deeply about their work. All of our teachers participate in extensive PD through the Internationals Network for Public Schools, which is designed to ensure that teachers in all content areas deliver instruction that meets the language and content needs of students. In addition, our teachers are also receiving ongoing PD provided by the New York City Writing Project to increase college readiness through developing writing skills. This professional development helps to ensure that all units are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and support the needs of ELLs. Recently, FIHS faced the challenge of transitioning to PBATs, but we know that this transition helped us to grow because a strong graduation portfolio made up of performance tasks, must be aligned to the CCLS and have students thinking deeply about their work. In our first years, we found that many students struggled to complete and present these tasks so we know we have more work to do. As a new system, this is an area of growth for us. Our specific needs involve: ● supporting all students to present and defend their PBATs in the second language, ● better understanding how to create PBAT projects that allows for differentiated approaches ● better understanding how to assess PBATs according to the rubric, and scaffolding and supporting student work in the lower grades to support eventual successful completion of the graduation portfolio. While our school is strong in trust, supportive environment and collaborative teachers, we need to continue to develop in the area of Rigorous instruction from the Framework. While our graduation has improved by 10% over the past 5 years we continue to work on making sure our students are college-ready, our most recent cohorts have larger groups of SIFE and unaccompanied minors, making it more challenging to graduate them in 4 years. As per our most recent school quality report, the college readiness is 31%. In addition our weighted Regents pass rate for ELA and Math are only approaching target and are not yet meeting it. Our population is 100% ELLs (86%) or former ELLs (14%) so they are trying to learn the English language while simultaneously learning the different content areas. We have a very short time to help students learn the language and be ready for college when they come to us. Particularly because 25% of our students are overage. We know that further development of our Performance-based assessment system will best support this work because of the intense level of reading, writing and critical thinking. However, having students do all the PBATs in 12th grade can be overwhelming and discouraging for students. In order to best track our students progress towards graduation, we need to have more students presenting earlier. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 70% of the 11th grade class will have passed at least 3 of the 7 PBATs. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly instructional and discipline team meetings for planning and curriculum reviews All teachers August 2018-June 2019 Bi weekly professional development sessions focusing on development of tasks aligned to the junior institute rubrics and rubric norming All teachers August 2018-June 2019 Peer observations for feedback on the instruction related to the tasks All teachers August 2018--June 2019 Team leaders and discipline leaders PD committee, NYC Writing project consultant Personnel committee Interdisciplinary teacher teams will work to support each other in the skills that student need to complete the tasks. All teachers August Discipline leaders 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will organize a series of family workshops to help them to understand how to support students with PBATs at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have built meeting time into the school day. To accomplish our goals, teachers have assumed the following leadership positions during school and after school: ● instructional team leaders (5) ● discipline leaders (5) ● PD committee chair (1) ● NYC Writing Project Consultant ● Special Education liaison (1) In addition, we have created biweekly after-school professional development each week. This additional time supports whole-staff work in creating and revising curriculum tailored toward ELLs. We will need per session to pay teachers for this additional planning and meeting time and to pay for ongoing PD with the Internationals Network for Public Schools. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All eleventh graders will be assigned a mentor in September of 2018. By January 2019, the 11th grade team will have developed and implemented one task for at least 2 subject areas so that the 11th grade students can present at least 1 of these before the end of the year. This work will support our work in developing our Framework element of Rigorous Instruction in our school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress to graduation tracking sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At the Flushing International High School, we understand the importance of students social-emotional development and have integrated this work into our school through a strong advisory program and college and career access work throughout the 4 years. We consistently score above average in the school environment survey, this year exceeding our target. This is an area of strength for us and is aligned to Supportive Environment in the Framework for Great Schools. One area that we have been working on developing is our new Community School grant. This is a wonderful opportunity for students and families to get additional support and we are in our second year of implementation and plan to launch a Saturday academy for students and families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 20% of students will have participated in some part of our Saturday program. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A group from across constituencies will work with our Community School director to develop Saturday programming for our students. The CSD and our Community School liaison will work with advisors to enroll students in programs that match their needs. The counseling team will meet regularly with instructional teams to help advisors identify students for extended-day. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 Principal Teachers, students, families, counselors, support staff All teachers October – November 2018 All teachers October-January 2019 PD committee chair Counseling team leader Ongoing family workshops will also incorporate student recruitment in extended-day. All teachers October-Parent Coordinator June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator, will organize a series of family workshops to help them to understand how to understand the extended-day program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher and Counselor Per session for parent meetings, Per session for student support committee members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, at least 10% of our students will have participated in some way in the extended-day program. At least one training will have taken place for families. This is aligned to the Framework element of Supportive Environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our Community Schools director will be tracking attendance in programs through the Community Schools attendance tracker and will provide regular updates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through our use of our online grading system and ongoing collaborative culture, teacher teams regularly use data, student data and a variety of assessments to both support students and plan for next steps. Because we believe in a heterogeneous model for our classroom instruction, this classes for careful scaffolding and differentiating in the classroom. Our classrooms have a wide-variety of ability levels, which therefore calls for projects with well-developed entry points for diverse learners. By focusing on student needs analyzed through our data from Jumprope, teachers can better create projects that gives them appropriate entry points while also helping to prepare them for their final graduation portfolio panels. In addition, because our students are new arrivals, the ELA exam is a particular challenge for them and for us. Usually, our pass rate is about 50%. Because these performance tasks are aligned to the CCLS we believe that the work on them will also help students to do better on the ELA Regents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will show a 5% increase in our 11th grade passing rate on the CC ELA exam from the previous year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will work with team leaders and discipline teams to support them in analyzing student data connected to the ELA/PBAT aligned outcomes in each discipline. All teachers Oct 2018 – June 2019 AP and principal The PD committee will incorporate support for this work in staff-wide PDs, and support for student mentoring All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 PD committee chair Teams of teachers will develop formative tasks connected to the graduation PBAT and CC ELA Regents which assess the 5 high-leverage outcomes preparing them for the graduation tasks and the exam. Teams of teachers will track high-leverage outcomes in content areas and struggling student subgroups who are in need of support in these goals and develop strategies and interventions to help move them forward. All teachers Oct 2018– Discipline leaders March 2019 All teachers Oct 2018– June 2019 Discipline leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will organize a series of family workshops to help them to understand how to support students in meeting our mastery-based high-leverage outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher and Counselor Per session for Coordinating Council meetings, Per session for PD committee members Per session for instructional team meetings Technology programs and materials to support intervention classes Per session for teachers, counselors and social workers for RFPs (TBD depending on RFP proposals submitted and accepted) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 20  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, discipline teams will have analyzed data connected to the first task and begun to plan spring instruction based on this data so that both tasks will be implemented by June of 2019. This is aligned to the element of Collaborative Teachers in the Framework for Great Schools. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBAT and CC ELA aligned outcomes in Jumpro.pe Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our instruction is based firmly on the Internationals model and as part of that, assessment type and purpose are a critical part of our work. We have worked hard to use our Jumprope grading system, a mastery-based system, and our performance tasks to assess our students’ learning and help provide clear next steps. However, our students are still struggling to meet graduation requirements. We know that for students, giving them an opportunity to talk about what they are learning is a way to gain deeper understanding and helps to better meet the diverse needs in the classroom. We want to focus on teacher observations and the PBAT presentations to help strengthen our students discussion skills in our classrooms. This work is aligned to the element of Effective School Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of teachers will grow in the area of questioning and discussion, due to regular teacher observations, strategic professional learning, and targeted feedback with special attention differentiating instruction. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In early fall, Principal and AP will support instructional team leaders in facilitating the teachers on their team in self-assessing and developing individual goals using the Danielson rubric during their team meetings and aligning them to key areas of the Internationals Model. By October, teachers will develop their annual goals using the research-based Danielson classroom rubrics based on the areas of growth they identified in their self-assessment. The Literacy Coach will meet with teachers that need more targeted support in developing and achieving their goals. In October and November each teacher will meet with the Principal or AP to discuss and refine their goals. After which, the Principal and AP will develop a schedule for regular informal teacher observation. All teachers will be expected to develop a goal aligned to our instructional focus on differentiation. The personnel committee with develop peer observations and partner teachers based on their areas of growth. These observations will give feedback on the goals developed from the Danielson rubric. The Personnel Committee will work with the Professional Development committee to develop at least 1 PD to facilitate the peer observation process. Principal and AP will target their feedback towards teacher goals and assessment, setting next steps after each observation for teacher growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept – Nov 2018 AP, principal All teachers Nov 2018 – May 2019 Personnel committee chair All teachers Nov 2018 – May 2019 Personnel and PD committee chairs All teachers Nov 2018 – AP, principal May 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will organize a series of family workshops to help them to understand how to support students with student discussion. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher and Counselor Per session for Coordinating Council meetings, Per session for PD committee members Per session for personel meetings Per session for staff PD Coverages and per session for peer observations Per session for teachers, counselors and social workers for RFPs (TBD depending on RFP proposals submitted and accepted) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb 2019, goal conferences and first 2 rounds of observations plus the first peer observations should be completed. In addition, we will have completed 1 semester of our PD focus on differentiation. Peer and administrator feedback will be focused on differentiation in the classroom. This is aligned to the element of Effective School Leadership in the Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance tracking system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We know that because our families are recent immigrants, they often feel lost and overwhelmed with the American education system. Most of our families do not speak English and therefore may feel uncomfortable participating in their child’s education. We put tremendous resources into translation services and helping the families to feel welcomed. However, we also know that many of our families work and cannot often come to school to meet with us. Therefore , we use an online, mastery-based system that parents can log into at anytime to track their child’s progress. Now that we have families that are more comfortable using the program, we would like to work on training families to use this system to communicate more regularly with us since we know that they often cannot come in to meetings because of work schedules. We know that we need to improve this area because our lowest category on the Learning Environment survey was in Strong Family-Community Ties from the Framework for Great Schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 35% of families will have participated in either one our monthly.workshops or Saturday programs for families. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In September, we will work with the PTA to develop a calendar of monthly workshops for families as well as the regular Saturday programming. All families September 2018 During orientation for all families, calendars and Saturday programming will be shared and families will be encouraged to participate. During parent- teacher conferences PTA members will hold Native language meetings with families to encourage them to participate. All families Fall 2018 All families Fall and Spring 2018 Throughout the year, flyers and phone calls will encourage families to participate and reach out to language contacts in the school with questions. All families Fall -Spring 2019 Team leaders, parent coordinator, PTA Parent coordinator and team leaders Team leaders, parent coordinator, PTA Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our parent coordinator will organize a series of family workshops to help them to understand how to use our communication platforms. AAFE and Ramapo will facilitate workshops through our Community Schools grant. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher and Counselor Per session for parent meetings, Per session for SSL committee members, Jumprope grading system Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  By Feb 2019 20% of families will have participated so that we can achieve our year-end goal of 35% by June and strengthen the Strong Family-Community Ties in the Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent incoming call sheets and sign-ins, Jumpro.pe system, School Cnxt system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Regents, Pre & Post Assessments Achievement Outcomes Unit Grades/Progress Reports Formative tasks Mathematics Regents, Pre & Post Assessments Achievement Outcomes Unit Grades/Progress Reports Formative tasks Science Achievement Outcomes Unit Grades/Progress Reports Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Recent immigrant English Language Learners receive after- and before- school tutoring in English, in order to build their literacy skills and improve their ability to participate and complete homework and projects in all of their content area classes. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. In addition, students use the ilearn platform for extra support. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students’ language is developed in all content areas classes and via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. After-school programs include College Now, music, Science Challenge, Creative writing, Yearbook, Multicultural Student Squad, Tech Squad, student government. Small group, individual tutoring and ilearn Science skills are developed via after-school programs which emphasize When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All students who require extra support for the ELA exam receive before- and after- school Regents prep, Saturday review class or during an intervention class that meets 2X per week. All students who require extra support for the Integrated Regents exam receive before- and after- school Regents prep, Saturday review class or during an intervention class that meets 2X per week. All students who require extra support for to pass their Science PBAT receive 2018-19 CEP 28  Formative tasks Social Studies Achievement Outcomes Unit Grades/Progress Reports Formative tasks At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Patterns in Attendance & Lateness, Referrals from teachers, Emotional Issues, Promotion, At Risk situations before- and after- school support or an intervention class that meets 1X per week. cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. After-school opportunities for students are offered for students who need additional support in completing mandated Regents lab experiments. Skills are developed via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interaction with peers. Students who require additional preparation for their history PBAT are offered a 1X per week intervention course and/or after-school or Saturday review classes. Before or after-school, lunchtime and advisory sessions. Students who are having difficulty adjusting to school meet in small groups with their guidance counselor to discuss school issues and develop strategies for success. Advisory groups and support circles are run by staff to support struggling students. Small group and individual counseling available as needed. individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Before- and after-school tutoring for our most recent immigrant ELL students. Students who require additional preparation for the Living Environment Regents exam will receive small group tutoring before or after school or during lunch-time study sessions. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. Before- and after-school tutoring for our most recent immigrant ELL students Guidance counselors meet in individual sessions with students who exhibit at-risk behaviors, while also meeting with and advising families on free options for more in-depth counseling outside of school. Counselors also meet with teachers weekly to help develop strategies to support at-risk students in class. Other services provided by guidance counselor, social workers, and 2018-19 CEP 29  teaching staff, include condom availability and individual counseling on health-related issues. Our advisory program, where a small group of students meet twice weekly with an advisor to discuss personal and academic challenges. Restorative justice practices are regularly followed to provide students support in advisory. Health topics are also an integral part of the school’s advisory program and the school nurse also provides health-related services. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 65 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are given a teacher advisor that they meet with twice a week and are checked in with regularly by a counselor where they can receive counseling services. In addition, our Family Development advocate through our CBO partner, Asian Americans for Equality. meets with them and their families to check-in on services and progress towards finding permanent housing. In addition, students are given supplies and we have emergency supplies available that are specifically put aside for STH students such as backpacks, books, stationary, etc. After-school homework help is also provided for any STH students who may need a quiet place where they can complete their homework or receive additional academic support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A, we are Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A, we are Title I 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A, we are Title I 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. FIHS recruits highly qualified teaching candidates through both the NYCDOE Open Market system, the Performance Standards Consortium and via the Internationals Network of Public Schools, a non-profit organization that oversees and coordinates activities amongst the NYCDOE’s 15 International High Schools. Through our membership in this network, we have access to resumes of the school system’s most highly qualified pedagogues with vast experience working with ELLs, who solely comprise all of the International High Schools’ student populations. Our hiring committee reviews resumes and only calls in candidates for interviews who are fully licensed in the subject area. In addition, we have close relationships with both Queens College and NYU from which we regularly host student teachers who we can train in our model. Currently, 7 of our staff members were once student teachers at our school. We also use organizations that we have relationships with like Math for America to recruit HQ teachers. FIHS’ rate of teacher attrition is extremely low, due to opportunities for teacher leadership and high quality professional development. Our teacher-led personnel committee invites interested candidates to visit our classes so they can observe students engaged in classroom instruction and to teach demonstration lessons. All constituents of our school staff participate in interviews of promising candidates. Hiring decisions are made using consensus. Our Literacy Coach provides targeted professional development for all new teachers and other teachers on a case-by-case basis. The Coordinating Council, FIHS’ ruling body, is comprised mainly of representatives from each of the school’s interdisciplinary teaching teams, but also includes representatives from guidance, disciplines, administration, standing committees, students and parents. Thus teachers have great decision-making power in establishing, maintaining and altering school-wide policies. Further, professional growth of all pedagogues is fostered on two levels: weekly subject area discipline meetings and weekly interdisciplinary grade level team meetings. During common prep periods, all teachers of the same subject area discipline meet and follow protocols in order to analyze and provide feedback on each other’s curriculum, with a critical eye towards meeting the tenets of the Internationals Approach, as well as the school-wide goals as informed by the INPS rubric. Teachers also meet in their teams weekly in order to discuss student progress. They examine the work of their mutually shared students. In this way, all of a student’s teachers come together to discuss his or her progress, as well as look for broader patterns in student learning that can be altered to improve student achievement. Because each team contains at least one ENL-certified teacher, each team member, regardless of subject area certification, learns about ENL strategies to further enhance instruction across disciplines. All teachers also receive specialized training in ENL strategies and working with ELLs through network-wide professional development through the Internationals Network for Public Schools. They provide workshops during the summer, Election Day, and at various times throughout the school year through after-school seminars and teacher intervisitations (peer observations at various IHSs). 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 33  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We offer a number of professional development opportunities within our school which begins with teacher goal setting. Teachers set goals using the Danielson framework after self-assessing on this rubric. They develop goals based on 3 areas of growth. They are observed a minimum of 3 times per year where they receive feedback and next steps. They are partnered with peers for peer observations to give each other feedback in their areas of growth at least 2 times per year. They meet weekly in subject area teams and also in grade-level teams to plan, share and revise curriculum based on the CCLS and review student work and data connected to the CCLS. In addition, the PD committee plans bimonthly full-staff PD that supports teachers in the Common Core shifts. Finally, we also reach out to our partners, Internationals Network for Public Schools, New York State Performance Standards Consortium, QTEL, Morningside Center and Jumprope for ongoing PD in helping our work to become more closely aligned to the CCLS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL Committee analyzed and discussed appropriate assessment measures for the entire school. In addition, they surveyed the teachers in order to receive feedback about the correct assessments to choose. Subject area teams meet a minimum of once weekly to discuss curriculum and assessment. Teams work together with the support of administration to develop assessments to help track student progress. In addition, we have used a standards-based assessment system since 2012, that calls for multiple forms of assessment. Teacher teams analyze data from this system to make changes to instruction and better serve student needs. Students are given multiple opportunities to 2018-19 CEP 34  achieve learning goals through a variety of assessments. Over the past year, the PD committee, made up of teachers, has worked to create staff-wide PD to support teachers in this work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X X X Section 5, part 4 Section 5, part 4 Section 5, part 4 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 240,870.00 0 44,750.00 0 3,267,666.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 35   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Flushing International High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Flushing International High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 37  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 38  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Flushing International High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our CSD is working closely with our Coordinating Council, Attendance team, Counseling team and Parent Coordinator to develop a coherent program of ELT offerings, wrap-around services and family engagement activities that are aligned to our program. Student advisors are working with students and families to enroll them in these opportunities. This year we are using our resources to pair academic tutoring on Saturdays with parent workshops to increase whole family involvement in the school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of students will have participated in at least 90 hours of programming Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? All of our students are recent immigrants who are ELLs, 20% of which are SIFE students. Close to 90% of our students qualify for free or reduced lunch. Our families are all recent immigrants who are working and often don't have experience participating in school activities and don't know how to get the help they need for their family. Our students need additional time to develop their English and academic skills and our families need help in learning how to support them. Achieving these goals will give our students more learning time, time to develop their English and leadership skills in a more relaxed setting and will help families to get the help they need so that they can become more involved in their child's education. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership YMCA Target Population students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal enrichment, leadership , academic support and college access activities 25% of students will have participated in at least 90 hours of programming Follow us to Success students SAT prep 25% of students will have participated in at least 90 hours of programming 2018-19 CEP 42  Keys to abundant life students and families AAFE families Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment After school culinary workshop for students with their families 25% of students will have participated in at least 90 hours of programming Family workshops and support services 20% of families will participate in a CS program Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use all the resources available to us to implement this plan. We will use both CBO and school staff to run ELT programs. In addition, we will use both our counseling team and the CBOs social emotional staff to run the parent support and engagement activities. We will also supplement our 21st century funding with both our TItle I funding and our Title III funding to support the ELT activities for students and professional development time for staff. Through the PROSE initiative, we already have a schedule that folds in significant staff meeting time where the action plan can be developed and discussed at every school level and where the CSD can participate to give and receive feedback. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP 43  The CSD will work closely with the school to complete a needs assessment for both students and families. They will help to facilitate advisors working with their advisees to complete surveys indicating their needs. In addition, they will work with our school counseling team to conduct focus groups in the fall to hone in on needs with both students and families. These needs will be shared with the school's Coordinating Council and the SLT in order to create better coherence with the ELT program and with the what is happening during the school day. We will need to consider what programming we have already had in place and plan to thoughtfully supplement it based on what we learn from the focus groups and surveys. We will also share this information during our monthly family workshops so that we can get feedback from the community. In addition to a weekly meeting with the administrative team, the CSD will also be part of our decision-making body, our Coordinating Council, and our regular attendance and counseling team meetings so that relevant data can be shared and we can use it to make decisions for the school and plan next steps for the program. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. YMCA: ELT, counseling, enrichment. Follow us to Success: ELT. Keys to abundant Life: Enrichment, AAFE: parent involvement. Center for Supportive Schools: parent involvement and teacher PD. 2.The principal, teacher team leaders, CSD, committee chairs, student government rep, PTA president and support staff representative will make up the CST and they will met 2 times per month. The CSD will share regular updates and data with all stakeholders to help with decision-making and developing next steps for the program. 3. In addition to using the data sorter, we will also use timely information on attendance, student scholarship data and program participation to indicate groups of students that need to be targeted with programming and support. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Adjustments to individual student programs will be made for those students who will be attending the ELT classes so that parents are aware of the longer school day. We will have our program coordinator liaise regularly with the CSD to make sure that implementation is working well. Our parent coordinator and program coordinator will need to work more closely with teachers and counseling staff to communicate and enroll students in the program. We will work closely with our CSD to deal with any additional adjustments that may be needed. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The program will begin the second week of September 2018 and will continue to June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Flushing International School serves a heterogeneous mix of exclusively ELLs or former ELLs. Students may enroll if they have been in the country for less than 4 years and have scored as either Entering, Emerging or Transitioning on the NYSITELL/NYSELSAT. In reality, the vast majority of our students are brand new OTCs and our school is the first one they have attended in this country. Currently, 90% of our students enrolled are still ELLs and 10% are Commanding. About 17% are at the Entering level, 25% are Emerging, 27% are Transitioning and 20% are Expanding. Most of our Entering and Emerging students are in the 9th and 10th grade, where we have most of our intakes and most of our Transitioning and Expanding students are in the 11th and 12th grade, students who have been with us for at least 1 year. We are quickly trying to support these students in both learning academic content and English and we have a very short time to do so. In order to meet this challenge, the Flushing International High School uses a content-based ESL program for our recent immigrant ELL students (content and language integration). Teams of teachers (five-six on each team) design and implement their own standards-based, interdisciplinary, project-based curricula for the 75-100 students they mutually share. All classes are taught in English and teachers in all content areas infuse their curricula with ESL methodologies and strategies for language development. Most course work in the classroom is completed in cooperative learning groups, where students are heterogeneously mixed (by language, academic level, gender, and ethnicity) so as to optimize opportunities for language development. All core academic classes (English literature, math, science, social studies, and the arts) meet four-five times weekly for 60 minutes each. This year we will serve 440 recent immigrant students in 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade. Our ELL students in grades 9-12 who are also offered the following supplemental Title III programs: Saturday “Explorers” Program (October-May 2019): New Emerging and Entering ELL students and those identified as SIFE will be encouraged to participate in the Saturday Explorers program on Saturdays twice a month. This program couples a field-based learning experience for students incorporating visits to cultural, educational, and recreational sites around New York City with direct instruction by a licensed ESL teacher. Sites to be visited include the Queens Hall of Science, Queens Museum of Art, and the New York Aquarium. Direct instruction and hands-on literacy activities will be designed for each site visit. These Saturday sessions students will receive supplementary academic and literacy instruction from both a math content teacher and an ESL teacher. Two teachers, one ESL and one math content-area will supervise and instruct a small group of approximately 15-20 students for 5 hours on a Saturday mornings from 10:00-3:00. The program will run from October through May and occur 2x per month for a total of 16 sessions . The 20 students will be provided with Metrocards to ride the subway or bus to and from these program sessions at no cost to the Title III program. Materials include: pens, pencils, markers, museum admissions, novels, journals, chart paper and graph paper. Museum admissions, journals and novels will be purchased with Title III. These materials are separate from the materials used in our regular classes. Attendance records and program information will be maintained by the lead teachers. After School Academic Program for ELLs: 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information We have noticed through the past couple of years that our students who do not pass their classes are often our Entering and Emerging students. Therefore, each of our five interdisciplinary instructional teams, which include at least one ESL teacher, organizes before-school and after-school direct academic instructional support for at-risk ELLs in the 9th and 10th grade in the Entering and Emerging levels who are not meeting the standards in their classes. Starting on October 16th, an ESL teacher will work together with a content-area teacher in a team teaching model, to improve student achievement and help students to meet the standards that they are struggling with as identified through our online, standards-based grading program, Jumpro.pe. The content areas teachers (Math, Science and Social Studies ) will team teach with an ESL teacher and use flexible groupings to meet the needs of the students. Direct instruction in English with support of native language will seek to accelerate students’ academic language development and academic achievement in the content areas. These sessions will take place after school, usually from 3:30-4:30/5:00 on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Each team sets a different schedule for its students so the exact schedule will vary from team to team but the total number of classes offered across the school per week is 10. This program will be offered October-May, for 26 weeks. So that each class will have 26 sessions. The number of ELLs in this program is 80 students. Twelve teachers will be involved in the program, 5 ESL and 7 content-area teachers.Schedule of classes - each class has 1 content teacher and 1 ESL teacher:Tuesdays (3:30-4:30): 3 Math Classes; Thursdays (3:30-5:00): 1 History, 1 Math, 1 Science class, 1 English; Friday (3:30 - 4:30): 2 English, 1 Math Supplemental materials include poster paper, markers, pens, pencils, graph paper, math manipulatives and journals. English and Math Enrichment for ELLs:We will offer C.C. Algebra I and English enrichment for 10-12th grade ELLs who have been in the country for more than 1 year and need additional support to pass their classes in these content areas. The classes will be offered on Tuesdays, Thursdays from 3:30 to 4:30 or from 7:30 - 8:30 AM from October to June and will integrate some support for the Regents exams, thus helping students make progress towards graduation. Two sessions morning per week will be for math and 2 afternoon sessions per week will be for math. In addition, 2 afternoon sessions of English will also be offered per week. Two teachers (1 ESL and 1 Math) will be involved in this program. They will create the materials needed for the classes that are scaffolded for ELLs. The classes are taught in English in conjunction with an ESL teacher who can support the students and their language development. Fifty students will be part of this program. Teacher-created materials will be used. Saturday English and Math Enrichment - We will offer 10 Saturday sessions with 2 classes (one math, one English) offered for students- math and ELA. Classes will be 2 hours each Saturday for a total of 40 hours for each class. Three teachers, 2 ESL teachers and 1 math content teachers will be participating in this program and these staff members will create the materials to be used in the classes, creating content materials that are scaffolded appropriately for ELLs. The classes are taught in English by or in conjunction with an ESL teacher who can support the students' and their language development as they prepare for these exams. Fifty students will be a part of this program. Supplemental materials will include: chart paper, markers, graph paper, novels, pens, pencils and journals. Non-fiction reading and writing support:According to our last school quality snapshot, only 31% of our students are considered college-ready because of the challenge they have in getting a 75 or above on the ELA Regents with such a short time in the country. Therefore, we need to develop opportunities for students to work with more academic language, particularly for students who are stuck in the transitioning and expanding levels. Therefore, on Tuesday and Thursday mornings from 7:30 to 8:30 AM, two ESL teachers in conjunction with our New York City Writing Project consultant (at no cost to TItle III) will work with a group of 20 11-12th grade Transitioning to Expanding ELLs to improve their reading and writing skills using nonfiction materials. ELLs who still have not achieved a 75 on the ELA Regents will be targeted for the 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information program. With the focus on nonfiction in the CCLS, this support class was designed to help our ELLs meet the CCLS and prepare for the demands of college reading and writing. The sessions will begin in October and run through May for a total of 16 sessions. Supplemental m aterials will include: chart paper, markers, graph paper, novels, pens, pencils and journals and records will be kept by the teachers. Emerging Language Class:A language class will run for new arrivals and Emerging to Entering 9th and 10th students who are struggling to learn English. Twenty students will receive basic direct instruction in English after-school and the class will be taught by an ESL teacher who is also bilingual certified in Chinese and fluent in Spanish. Classes will run on Fridays from 3:30 to 5:00 from October to May for a total of 25 sessions. The class will focus on fun activities and getting students comfortable reading, writing listening and speaking in basic English. Supplemental materials will include: pens, pencils, paper, chart paper, journals, novels and DVDs and records will be kept by the teacher. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The Literacy Enrichment for SLIFE: This course emphasizes language development for students in 9th and 10th who come to our school community with insufficient Formal Education (SLIFE). This can be determined based on the results of their initial assessment, content class performance, ongoing observations and or self/family advocacy. This program follows our school’s instructional model of project-based learning, with integration of language and content and literacy development. It employs a variety of styles and genres that include culturally diverse texts and multiple perspectives with opportunities for students to connect texts to their present lives and world issues. It is a semester course to give students the opportunity to ‘graduate’ from the course based on their mastery and development and, to also allows other students to join the course based on their individual needs. Language Development: Students will develop their English proficiency in the 4 modalities and will be assessed in a variety of ways. Listening and Speaking through oral presentations, literature circles, storytelling and group discussions. Writing through structured note-taking, summary-writing, journals about different topics, and by organizing their thoughts into paragraphs. Reading by reflecting on literature in adapted essays, memoirs and poetry. The class will be taught by an ESL teacher and it will run on Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 7:30 to 8:30 from October to May for a total of 50 sessions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: All 15 of our Title III teachers attend bi-weekly professional development on Mondays from 3:40 to 4:40 for teachers focused on integrating ESL methodologies and supporting students’ language development. The sessions start on Sept 10 and end on June 10, for a total of 17 sessions. Professional development is facilitated by Kevin Hesseltine, our ESL-licensed AP and Grace Raffaele, a New York City Writing Project Teacher Consultant with extensive experience and training in working with English Language Learners. The fall semester sessions (Sept 17, Oct 1, Oct 22, Nov 5, Nov 19, and Dec 3, Dec 17, Jan 09 and 23) will be on design, differentiation and vertical alignment of graduation-level 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development performance-based assessments for ELLs: Integrating language development and content. The spring sessions (Feb 4, Feb 18, March 4, March 21, April 01, April 15, May 6 , May 20, and June 10) will focus on differentiating and integrating literacy skills among other strategies for ELLs. Additionally, 4 of these PD sessions (Sept 24, Dec 17, March 04 and May 20) will focus on social-emotional supports for ELLs and be facilitated by Lu Zhang, bilingual school counselor and Roxie Solomon, ESL-licensed pedagogue. We will maintain all of our agendas in our PD binder and PD google folder and attendance sheets will be maintained by the payroll secretary. Teachers also receive extensive PD through our partner organization, Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS). This group, a non-profit organization, was founded in part to coordinate the professional development activities among all 15 of the city’s International High Schools. INPS provides after-school and Saturday workshops for teachers in all subject areas who deal directly with ELL students, focusing on: language development in the content areas, differentiation of instruction, scaffolding, and other ESL techniques. They also facilitate working groups among schools, oversee an online database for sharing ELL-friendly curriculum across schools, and provide added guidance and support for faculty members new to the Internationals. INPS also develops the November PD. All teachers will attend performance-based assessment task for ELLs PD on Nov 6th. The intervisitations will allow this work to be extended throughout the school year and will occur monthly. All Title III teachers will attend at least one intervisitation related to performance assessment for ELLs.Five of the Title III teachers of ELLs will participate in four sessions of professional development sponsored by the Internationals Network for Public School. These sessions will tentatively be on December 5th, February 1st, March 13th, and June 17th. Each session will be from 4 to 7 PM. INPS is a nationally recognized leader in ELL instruction. The topics covered will include project design for ELLs, integrating language and content, supporting native language development, and effective assessment strategies. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Since all our families are recent immigrants, we know that the American school system is completely new to them. We also understand how critical engagement with our families is as we support our students in transitioning to a new language and culture. Therefore, the school social worker, guidance counselor, and teachers collaborate on a series of monthly workshops designed to meet the academic and social-emotional needs of our ELL students and their families. Workshop topics are developed in conjunction with our school’s ELL parent leadership and held in multiple languages. We will maintain all of our invitations, agendas and attendance in our Parent Workshop binder. Topics will include college and career readiness for ELLs, planning for academic success, supporting your child in high school, immigration rights and family separation. These workshops will take place in the evening each month for two and a half hours each and on Saturdays. Parents will be informed of workshops through flyers mailed home and written in multiple languages and calls home in multiple languages. Interpretation services and 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities refreshments will also be provided for all workshops and funded with Title I funds. Each monthly workshop will serve up to 50 individual family members of our students. The timeline of workshops is from October through May, from 6 PM to 8:30 PM on weekdays and from 9AM to 1PM on Saturdays. The schedule and providers are listed below: September 26, 2018 ELLs Service Fair for new families; Provided by our bilingual counselors, Crecer Inc (mental health services), NYSLC (NY Student Leadership Council), UNLOCAL (legal services), Atlas DIY (legal services) September 29, 2018 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) October 17, 2018 Graduation requirements and college and career preparation for ELLS; provided by our bilingual counseling staff and one of our ENL teachers. October 27, 2018 (Saturday) - Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) November 15, 2018 College Application and Career Info for ELLS; provided by college counselor (a licensed ENL teacher), CUNY and SUNY reps November 24, 2018 (Saturday) - Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) November 28, 2018 Financial planning for college for ELLS; provided by college counselor (a licensed ENL teacher, Asian Americans for Equality, NYSLC (NY Student Leadership Council) December 8, 2018 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) December 20, 2018 Family separation and reunification of ELL families; provided by bilungual counseling staff, an ENL teacher and the Child Center of NY January 17, 2019 Jumpro.pe and School Grades portal workshop for ELL families; provided by bilingual counseling staff and ENL teachers January 26, 2019 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) February 14, 2019 Immigration workshop and legal screenings for ELL families; provided by Catholic Charities and Unlocal February 23, 2019 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) March 13, 2019 Parenting your ELL teenager; provided by bilingual counseling staff March 23, 2019 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) April 17, 2019 Supporting your child through testing and homework when you don't know the language (for families of ENLs), provided by bilingual counseling and ENL teaching staff April 27, 2019 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) May 28, 2019 Summer Resources for ELLs, provided by bilingual counseling staff. May 25, 2019 (Saturday)- Parents will be given a choice of workshop from a list of options (ESL & Computer literacy, ESL & Nutrition, ESL & Know your rights, ESL & Family Team building Activities, among others based on families interests) 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Conceptually Consolidated Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Conceptually Consolidated n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 25 School Name Flushing International High School School Number 263 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lara Evangelista Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katie Strauss Teacher/Subject Area Virginia Benayoun/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Rosmery Milczewski/Math Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Kevin Hesseltine Coach type here School Counselor Toni Mendoza Parent Ruben Sevichay Parent Coordinator Jessie Ortiz-Gavilanes Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 9 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 435 Total number of ELLs 390 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 89.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For newcomers and SIFE we initially use the LENS assessment to assess our students' literacy skills in their native language. We also use teacher-created assessments to provide us with each student's grade level in reading comprehension, writing, speaking and listening skills. The results offer a breakdown of specific areas of strengths and weaknesses, so we can gear our instruction toward helping the student in areas of academic need and tailor extra help specifically geared to those students. The teacher made assessments allow us to assess student's decoding skills, vocabulary and comprehension. The results of these assessments are shared with our content area teachers. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan, allowing us to design curriculum to address the specific needs of students. This data is used to inform our curriculum, instructional approaches and interventions. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes as well as in our afterschool and 2018-19 CEP 53  Saturday programming, students see improvement, in their scores over time. We are also using formative assessment tasks based on the Internationals Network Graduation portfolio rubrics. This data, along with that culled from our intake interview process, show that our students enter our program with a wide variety of prior schooling, academic skills, and literacy skills (in both English and their native languages). This data provide teachers with the information they need to properly differentiate their content area, project-based curricula, which is delivered to a student population that is heterogeneous on many fronts. Furthermore, by using a standards based grading system, it allows teachers to track students' growth in specific learning targets in all modalities and make informed decisions to help adjust instruction around language acquisition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Well structured teams are in place and teachers at Flushing International High School work in small teams. Teachers have dedicated time to work on interdisciplinary teams as well as content teams. These teams work closely together to look at student work and data in order to develop teaching strategies and structures to support students. In addition, these teams regularly use curriculum tuning protocols to better meet the needs of students. At the same time, committee meetings will be held regularly throughout the school year of 2017-2018. Coordinating Council is the school's central decision-making body. It includes the Administrative Team, Team Leaders, the UFT representative, a representative from the Counseling Team, as well as Discipline and Committee Representatives. A Team Leader is a member from each interdisciplinary team who sets agendas for team meetings, delegates team responsibilities, maintains team records and acts as the team representative on the Coordinating Council. Meetings address issues of importance to the school community. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • Graduation rate • Course pass rate • Regents pass rate • Attendance rate • Learning Environment Survey-student results • Learning Environment Survey -parent results • Learning Environment Survey-teacher results • Drop out rate • College Now class passing rate • Portfolio passing rate Internal quarterly scholarship reports The Flushing International High School is part of the Internationals Network for Public Schools which is a network of schools who have been granted a variance which allows for portfolio-based assessment in lieu of the New York State Regents Exams. We only administer the ELA Regents exam and Integrated Algebra Regents exam, which is why these are the only Regents we have included. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? A variety of intervention structures are employed to address the summative data analysis: • Attendance incentive programs Sustained Silent Reading (SSR) program: 60 min 2x a week younger ELLs are programmed for a regular reading period in which they are assisted in choosing appropriate texts and supported in their independent reading. • Saturday Explorer’s Club – Twice monthly, 2-3 faculty members provide a small group of SIFE students with experiential learning opportunities at various NYC sites with cultural, historical or educational significance. Activity guides designed by teachers specifically for each site visit promote literacy, language development, and numeracy. These trips are conducted in English • Intensive Senior Institute Seminar, Math – Students struggling with basic math and numeracy are mandated for this course that meets 2x a week. This class is taught in English. 2018-19 CEP 54  • Intensive Senior Institute Seminar, ELA – Basic language and literacy skills are integrated into this seminar that struggling older ELLs are mandated for. This class meets 2x a week and is taught in English. • Team Intervention Period – Once weekly struggling students have small group and one-on-one time with their teachers to receive on-going support with their classwork. • Regents Prep classes – Older ELLs who have not yet passed the Integrated Algebra or ELA Regents Examinations are offered Regents preparation classes taught in English. • Queens College/CUNY “College Now” – Approximately 40 of our students also participate in a Saturday program specifically designed for ELLs to provide content and language development support in ELA, History, and Math. iLearn NYC: targeted online credit recovery Credit intervention classes: offered 3x per week to support students in meeting class outcomes that they have not yet matered and/or completion of course extensions. • Student Community Involvement—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Every year, all 11th grade ELL students participate in an internship/career readiness program. These are all supplemental activities which will aid our students in acquiring English through a variety of community involvement activities. This targeted intervention targets students in all content areas but gives special emphasis to the content area of Social Studies. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-gropus which are targeted are the SIFE students, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of bilingual pedagogues, student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaires and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: We do not have grades K-5 at our school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data indicates that the majority of our incoming class are beginners. However, over the course of their 4 years most of our students improve in their literary skills. The last administration of the NYSESLAT indicated that of the students tested, 30% were entering to emerging, 62% are transitioning or expanding and 7% are Commanding. Most students moved up at least one level per year. An analysis of our NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results for the school revewals several things: a) Our population is incredibly heterogeneous in terms of language ability. b) Most students classified as beginners and intermediates are situated in the lower grades (9 and 10) while most students deemed advanced and proficient are in the higher grades (11 and 12). c) The vast majority of students show improvement in at least two of the NYSESLAT language modalities. d) Our NYSITELL data indicates that although most of our new arrivals test as Beginners and nearly all score very low in listening, reading, and writing, after this, the most crucial pattern we see is one of improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 55  The summative data that is gathered is distributed to counselling staff, instructional teams and the content teams. Teams meet weekly to reflect on the data identifying patterns, the root cause and developing targeted actions for improving student achievement. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. . Instruction: Instruction at our school is delivered collaboratively by teams of four to six teachers who work to plan instruction for groups of approximately 75-100 students. While teachers are responsible for teaching their own individual classes, they plan curriculum jointly and occasionally team teach classes as welll. Each group of students is block programmed and those students travel together throughout the day. Within their blocks 9th and 10th grade students are on three distinct interdisciplinary instructional teams while 11th and 12th grade students are on distinct instructional teams. The blocks are heterogeneous but at various times teachers may choose to group students within the block homogeneously if that suits the students’ and block’s needs for a specific project or learning activity. Teachers also use these blocks to take advantage of learning opportunities outside the building at such places as museums, cultural organizations, and other community organizations. Many of these courses are designed as interdisciplinary, meeting both the content and ESL standards, which allows us to provide some ESL minutes during content classes. Integrated and Standalone ENL are implemented in the following way: Beginning/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Intermediate/Transitionsing will receive 180 ENL minutes per week which consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week which consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week which consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Teachers will be dually certified in ELA and ENL in order to meet the mandate. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per the new CR Part 154 requirements, beginning September 2015, students will be carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on new proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated 2018-19 CEP 56  ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or intergrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning willl receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ENL and ELA minutes through discrete ENL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ESL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ESL and a content area such as ESL/English, ESL/Social Studies and ESL/Biology certification.) Many of our courses are designed as interdisciplinary, meeting both the content and ESL standards, which allows us to provide some ESL minutes during content classes. Each instructional team includes at least one teacher who is licensed in ESL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ESL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ESL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ENL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ENL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ENL instruction each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At The Flushing International High School our ESL teachers as well as all of our content area teachers provide content area support for ELL's through all content area classes. All students take math, science, social studies, and ESL and/or English every year. Although the language that teachers use from the front of the room is English, the language of instruction for specific projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native languages to explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that both develop language and content knowledge. The instructional method used in delivering content area instruction is through the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Approach. This research-based instructional approach utilizes five strategies which foster language deveopment and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. They consist of heterogeneity and collaboration, experiential and project based learning, language and content integration, localized autonomy and responsibility and one learning model for all. A variety of instructional materials are used such as: laptops, library books, work books, dictionaries and teacher-generated activities. The educational principles of The Internationals HS at LaGuardia include an approach to curriculum that is student-centered, inquiry- driven, and project-based, revolving around themes and essential questions that provide a balance between content and English language skill building. Small, heterogeneous grouping within classes provides a powerful vehicle for English acquisition, wherein students from diverse language backgrounds use English to accomplish a given task, drawing on their native language as a resource. Language and literacy are developed through interaction with peers and teachers about meaningful ideas in authentic context. In order to provide our students with native language support in the content area we provide our students with bilingual dictionaries, peer group support, native language texts and projects to assist in the classroom. All students take math, science, social studies, arts, and ESL and/or English every year. The Internationals approach is similar to a sheltered instruction model in that content area teachers have an understanding, training and background in teaching ELLs. Because students are on a team with an interdisciplinary team of teachers, the team works together to develop curriculum and materials for their ELL students. The ESL teacher on the team provides support in the scaffolding of the work and in corporating the content of other classes into their language class as a means of additional support. Although the language that teachers use from the front of the room is English, the language of instruction for specific Common-Core aligned projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native languages to 2018-19 CEP 57  explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. A variety of English and native language texts are used in the classrooms and many projects incorporate a native language component. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that develop both language and content knowledge simultaneously. The school makes a significant investment in professional development to make sure all of our teachers in every subject area have the necessary skills and conceptual understanding of language development to deliver the needed instruction that meets students’ needs. This professional development is ongoing and sustained from year to year and has focused on the past few years on aligning all of our curriculum to the Common Core. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL’s are appropriately evaluated using the instuctional strategies as described in Question # 6 (a-e) below. At orientation, incoming ELL’s are given a native language assessment. For more common languages, students on intake are administered paperwork in native language and are interviewed. Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish Lab and our native language staff can give feedback on projects and assessments. For languages where we don't have formal assessments in place, we rely on community partners, peers and families for feedback throughout the year. At Flushing International HS, we greatly value students' native languages. All of our interdisciplinary classes have native language components to them. We have a comprehensive native language performance-based assessment which all of our ELL students must complete. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Instructional plan for SIFE Students: We have found that many students that are labeled SIFE in ATS seem to be mislabeled, since some of these have been some of our highest achieving students. Therefore, through our internal interview and assessment process, we make sure to identify any SIFE student that will need additional support. In all content area classes, all SIFE students are heterogeneously mixed with their ELL peers. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. During a twice weekly targeted intervention period, our SIFE students work with a certified ESL teacher on their team for additional support. A weekend Explorers program and after-school tutoring provide additional support for these students. Also, testing accommodations such as extended time and use of bilingual glossaries are given. b) Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students: Newcomer ELLs are placed in heterogeneous ESL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. Newcomers may also participate in our Explorer's Club, a series of excursions to cultural institutions throughout NYC with companion literacy activities focusing on developing verbal and written skills. Also, testing accommodations such as extended time and use of bilingual glossaries are given. c. ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years are placed in heterogeneous ESL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, 2018-19 CEP 58  collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. Also, testing accommodations such as extended time and use of bilingual glossaries are given. d. Long-Term ELLs are placed in heterogeneous ESL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. Long-term ELLs receive support in our Senior Institute Seminars, a class that meets three times per week and is geared towards helping these students make up missing credits or preparing for the specific Regents examinations they have not yet passed. Also, testing accommodations such as extended time and use of bilingual glossaries are given. e. While our students who reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT are no longer considered ELLs, they are still in need of language development. Our instructional model, the “Internationals Approach,” insures that these students continue to develop their academic language alongside their ELL peers in our heterogeneously mixed classes. Teachers differentiate their project-based curriculum so that all of our students, ELLs and former ELLs alike, are being challenged in reading, writing, speaking and listening at their level of proficiency. Former ELLs also receive the appropriate testing accomodations including extended time, use of bilingual dictionaries and translated versions of the test in their native language when available. Also, testing accommodations such as extended time and use of bilingual glossaries are given and used for up to 2 years after they exit ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEP’s for ELL-SWD’s to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. Students are expected to meet the same standards as their classmates and teachers create scaffolded curricula that is age and grade appropriate that all students are expected to master. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional opportunities geared to their needs. We build from the students' strengths and identify areas where they have stronger skills that can support those that they are still trying to develop. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP. Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEP’s include: Teachers, guidance counselors and special education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as descreibed in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment, students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Teachers regularly use technology to support students, including the use of smartboards and laptops in the classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 59  Technological tools that function as assistive technology such as timers, audio players and recorders, calculators and reading guides help to scaffold and support students to meet the standards. Other strategies include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the special education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the special education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and areas which still need improvement. If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers Literacy Program which serves to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have a very small number of students with IEPs. A special education teacher both pushes in to classes and pulls students out during school-wide intervention periods. ELLs identified as special needs are accomodated per the mandates of their IEPs, which in most cases involves a push-in SETTS model, similar to an ICT class. All of our IEP students are part of the general ed classes. These students are placed in heterogeneous ESL and content area classes with ELL peers of varying academic, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds. Our special education teacher pushes in to these classes and works indivudally and in small groups with these students 4 periods a week during targeted intervention periods. In addition, the special education teacher works with teachers to further scaffold the curriculum to meet these students individual needs and goals. Instruction in all classes is project-based and incorporates multiple strategies for the acquisition of both language and content, including: layered curriculum, leveled reading materials, jigsaw readings, collaborative group work, oral presentations, project-based assessments, scaffolding, differentiation, and QTEL strategies. In addition, students with IEPs take an additional PASS class during the school day. This class further scaffolds and supports students with their graduation-level portfolio work and Regents in a smaller group setting with a special education and an ESL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention programs are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them, meaning that a translanguaging approach is used where students use both English and Native Language to access and understand content: • Sustained Silent Reading (SSR) program: 60 min 2x a week younger ELLs are programmed for a regular reading period in which they are assisted in choosing appropriate texts and supported in their independent reading. • Saturday Explorer’s Club – Twice monthly, 2-3 faculty members provide a small group of SIFE students with experiential learning opportunities at various NYC sites with cultural, historical or educational significance. Activity guides designed by teachers specifically for each site visit promote literacy, language development, and numeracy. These trips are conducted in English • Intensive Senior Institute Seminar, Math – Students struggling with basic math and numeracy are mandated for this course that meets 2x a week. This class is taught in English. • Intensive Senior Institute Seminar, ELA – Basic language and literacy skills are integrated into this seminar that struggling older ELLs are mandated for. This class meets 2x a week and is taught in English. • Team Intervention Period – Once weekly struggling students have small group and one-on-one time with their teachers to receive on-going support with their classwork. • Regents Prep classes – Older ELLs who have not yet passed the Integrated Algebra or ELA Regents Examinations are offered Regents preparation classes taught in English. • Queens College/CUNY “College Now” – Approximately 40 of our students also participate in a Saturday program specifically designed for ELLs to provide content and language development support in ELA, History, and Math. iLearn NYC: targeted online credit recovery Credit intervention classes: offered 3x per week to support students in meeting class outcomes that they have not yet 2018-19 CEP 60  matered and/or completion of course extensions. • Student Community Involvement—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Every year, all 11th grade ELL students participate in an internship/career readiness program. These are all supplemental activities which will aid our students in acquiring English through a variety of community involvement activities. This targeted intervention targets students in all content areas but gives special emphasis to the content area of Social Studies. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-gropus which are targeted are the SIFE students, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of bilingual pedagogues, student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaires and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Last year, we had our largest number of SIFE students, about 30% in the graduating cohort. This was a challenge for us and we saw a drop in our graduation rate and attendance by several percentage points, mostly related to the data connected to these students. We knew we needed to make some changes to better support this population. Therefore we developed the PASS class which will provide more targeted support for our SIFE students. We are sending teachers for professional development in literacy and numeracy strategies. We also developed an 0-period literacy class for our brand-new students. We are partnering with CARA, a college and career access organization to strengthen our college access curriculum. In addition we are strengthening our ELL enrichment program, with enrichment courses in ELA and MATH and targeted credit intervention to support struggling students. We are also looking into offering AP courses in students' native languages. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to make any cuts in our programs or services pending any change in the budget. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Since the vast majority of our students are ELLs and our strong belief in heterogeneity, all school programs - before, during and after-school - are “equal access” and open to everyone in our school. In addition to all in-school classes and programs and to the support and intervention services listed in the answer to question five of this section, we have the following after-school classes; while they may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development through activities incorporating listening, speaking, reading, and writing of English: • ELA and Math Regents Review for ELLs • Science Challenge (after-school program) • Creative Writing Group • Drama Club • English Language Game Club After-school homework help (3X per week) Theater Development Fund Chess Club Student Government Multisquad These clubs all take-place after-school and are paid for with both Title I and Title III funds. The goal is to continue the students' 2018-19 CEP 61  development of their English language skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Since all teachers design their own project-based curricula, there are too many instructional materials to name individually; all teachers draw from multiple sources in compiling classroom curricula and materials for all subgroups. Some examples include: • QTEL Institute curricula (language) • Internationals Network for Public Schools curricula (provides language and content materials) • History Alive! and Facing History curricula (history) Core curriculum for NYC high schools (content materials) • Technology including: o iMovie, Final Cut Pro (digital editing software) o Garageband o iPhoto o Microsoft Office applications o SMART Boards in all classrooms o VoiceThread o Google Documents and Google classroom iLearn Desire to Learn Achieve 3000 Aventa online curriculum (Spanish and English) Various native language texts (mostly Chinese and Spanish) in Global History, Living Environment, math and literature 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Our classroom libraries contain content materials in all of our major languages, including Mandarin, Spanish and Korean. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is an informational, communicative or creative piece in a language other than English, along with a written explanation of the piece in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our instructional teams meet regularly to ensure that required services and supports correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged ELLs are available to students. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. If a teacher or instructional team is having problems locating published materials that are appropriate to the age of the ELLs then the instructional teams work together to create an adapt material which will be appropriate to the age level of the ELL. For ELL-SWDs materials are adapted with the support of our Special Education teacher so that they correspond to their ages and grades while being appropriate to their grade-level. All students are held to the same standards, materials are just scaffolded based on their individual cognitive needs. Our teachers understand the importance of utilizing materials and resources for the ELL’s appropriate age level in order to keep them engaged in learning. In addition, 2018-19 CEP 62  instructional teams are encouraged to attend professional development workshops throughout the year in order to help them better meet the needs of ELLs with age and grade level appropriate to the content of the classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares a variety of resources, teachers from JHS189 have observed our classes, and JHS189 ELL students have toured our school. We have been awarded a community school grant in which we will work with JHS189 to provide additional support to students and families. Our schools also share Speech Pathologists and we work together on our School Based Support Team. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the start of the school year, new students are assigned to heterogeneous teams with, as far as practicable, students who speak their native language. The new students are then paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. In addition, students are given an advisor who meets biweekly with the student to assist the student, answer questions and ensure that the student is adjusting well. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? A weekly "College Now" ELA for ELL elective is offered in addition to a language and literacy seminar (ISIS) that meets 3x per week. We have also offered an elective course entitled "Spanish for Chinese speakers" and one entitled "Chinese for Spanish speakers." We also use Rosetta Stone and a number of students take language electives through our partnership with Queens College. A weekly elective session is offered to students who are interested in taking the AP Chinese and Spanish exams. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development for all staff at The Flushing International High School is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: • Inquiry Projects – groups of subject area teachers in a common area engage in action inquiry-based research projects throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ESL methodologies and strategies that will enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. This year, each content area group of teachers is focusing on different aspects of language development, specifically related to writing, and the Common Core Standards. Each group of discipline teachers is engaged in a Common Core Task, use 2018-19 CEP 63  it to diagnose student learning needs, collaboratively plan instructional strategies to meet these needs, and an analysis of the success of this instructional implementation. • Weekly professional development meetings for all pedagogues and counselors, including the assistant principal and special education teacher, which include the following activities: o Analysis of student work in order to improve instruction/design interventions o Analysis of student assessments (project-based learning) o Social-emotional progress of a teaching team’s shared students o Formation and refinement of discipline specific benchmarks at each grade level o Peer critiques of teacher-generated curricula • Peer observations – all pedagogues observe each other teach and write reflective letters pinpointing new strategies and techniques they have learned as a result. The broad focus of these peer observations is on how teachers can most effectively support students’ language development in all classes and subjects. • All staff participates in Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops – at three different points in the school year, our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ESL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development. All-day workshops are provided for APs, pedagogues, ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals, therapists, parent coordinators, counselors. • International High Schools Intervisitations – in order to promote more intra-network dialogue, and sharing of best practices and curriculum, groups of IHS teachers from across the network meet monthly at different IHSs across the city in order to learn from their best practices. • QTEL/OELL trainings – Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other OELL offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. • Conferences – faculty attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas. In addition to the staff PD, administrators, counselors, parent coordinators secretaries and special ed teachers attend monthly PD organized by the Internationals Network for Public Schools and/or the Affinity Group. Paraprofessionals, psychologists and therapists attend monthly PD organized by the BFC and the district. We have had ongoing Common Core training over the past 2 years and will continue to do so as we have been working to align all of our projects and curriculum to these standards. The Internationals Network for Public Schools has offered several PD sessions on the Common Core. Teachers have worked with their departments to learn about the Standards in term of their discipline as well as strategies to implement them. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 64  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development for all staff at is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: Interdisciplinary teams take responsibility for orienting new students to our school and program through our advisory program and by pairing them up with a "buddy" who shares the exact same class schedule. Counselors meet with teams each week to address concerns on the team and to help them support students as they transition. Counselors receive training through the Internationals Network. Our Student Support Committee has liaisons to each team and and administrator who meet biweekly to discuss student support issues, like transitioning and to create advisory curriculum to support advisors in this process. All of our teaching staff, which includes teachers who do not hold ESL or Bilingual licenses, are provided with a series of professional opportunities at International High School. The professional development program focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It also focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. All professional development at our school is focused on building capacity in all teachers to support students' language development in all classes by employing ESL methodologies since most of our students (and all of our newly admitted students) are ELLs. The professional development program described above provides multi-year, on-going professional development for all members of the faculty. Even if teachers participated only in the in-school professional development – the bare minimum for our teachers – they would be participating in a minimum of forty hours of professional development a year. In addition, our school participates in professional development organized by Internationals Network for Public Schools, including intervisitations, summer and election day professional development, and a variety of inter-school project-based learning opportunities. Since all staff participate in the above-mentioned professional development opportunities throughout the course of the school year, everyone receives many more hours than the current mandate. Our PD committee develops each PD and maintains records in our PD binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs at least one time during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences. At these meetings teachers will discuss the goals of the program, the language development process of the individual student, the language proficiaency assessment resluts as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas. At this meeting we will have content area teachers, the student counselor, and a school staff member to translate as needed. If no staff member is able to translate than we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to hold over the phone translations. Flushing International High School has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams. Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their weekly two hour meeting. Each interdisciplinary team has 40 minutes of their weekly team time to utilize for parent involvement time. This period of time which is within the teacher's contractual day is specifically set aside for meetings with parents of ELL's. Each team is assigned a Community Associate in order to place phone calls to parents to schedule meetings. In addition, each teacher on the team is assigned a small group of advisees who they meet with twice a week and get to know their families well so that they can regularly communicate with them about how their advisee is doing in class and with their English language development. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our entire school is for ELLs, all the parents involved are parents of ELLs or former ELLs. Over 50% of our students’ families regularly attend Open School Night and Open School afternoon. Turnout is lower for monthly Family Association meetings, even though we pair such events with student work showcases and CBO workshops We have far more engagement with parents and families at the individual student and interdisciplinary team level through our teaching teams as teams meet regularly with parents and guardians of our students. Our PTA officers meet monthly to plan workshops and monthly meetings. They also call families to encourage them to participate. We currently have 5 parents who are regular participants in our SLT. We also work with a CBO to encourage parent involvement. They run a Power Parents group made up of 15 of our parents who participate and volunteer regularly in our workshops and activities. For all meetings and activities we always have in-house Spanish, Chinese and Korean translators available. We use outside services if any other languages are needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lara Evangelista, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Flushing International HS School DBN: 25Q263 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lara Evangelista Title Principal Kevin Hesseltine Assistant Principal Jessie Ortiz-Gavilanes Parent Coordinator Katie Strauss ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ruben Sevichay Parent Virginia Benayoun Teacher/Subject Area Rosmery Milczewski Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Toni Mendoza School Counselor Kathy Pelles Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 7/23/17 7/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Flushing International HS Superintendent: Kathy Pelles DBN: 25Q263 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yessenia Ortiz-Gavilanes Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All of our students are recent immigrant English Language Learners and almost all of their parents or guardians are also new immigrants. As a result, we assume that all parents require translation and interpretation services with all school-family communication. We also surveyed our students and parents to find out in which language they would like all written and oral communication from the school. In addition to the home language survey, our parent coordinator also conducts a survey of parents preferred method of communication and language. In addition, we also use the parent blue cards and the ATS report of preferred languages. We then create a document that we update regularly with families preferred languages by grade and class. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bangla Burmese Chinese Arabic Bangla Burmese Chinese Arabic Bangla Burmese Chinese Cantonese Cantonese 100% Cantonese 100% Haitian-Creole Haitian-Creole Haitian-Creole Farsi French Hindi Italian Korean Farsi French Hindi Italian Korean Mandarin Nepali Mandarin Nepali Pashto Punjabi Russian Spanish Tibetan Urdu Pashto Punjabi Russian Spanish Tagalog Tibetan Urdu 100% 100% 100% Farsi French Hindi Italian Korean Mandarin Nepali Pashto Punjabi Russian Spanish Tagalog Tibetan Urdu 100% 100% 100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 70  N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. New student information packet- June-September Parent-teacher conference announcements- New York State Regents testing dates March credit letter and summer school PTA announcements and workshop flyers- Monthly workshop packets on topics such as college information and immigration information. Notification letter for first day of school, school calendar and orientations Early September, Mid-October, Early March, Mid-April. Early January, Early June March DOE translation unit DOE translation unit Monthly DOE translation unit September DOE translation unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? September and November 2017, March and May 2018 New Parent Orientations and Parent Teacher Conferences. In-house staff will provide interpretation or hired through Big Word PTA meetings-Monthly Every month from September 2017 to June 2018 Senior At-risk conferences October 2017 and March 2018 Individual meetings with parents of all ENL students-Throughout the year Monthly 2017-2018 In-house staff will provide interpretation or hired through Big Word In-house staff will provide interpretation or DOE language line In-house staff will provide interpretation or DOE language line 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have in-house staff that speaks most of the languages of our families for languages. They will reach out to the families whose languages they speak. Where we don't have in-house staff, we will use the DOE language line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our staff PD on the first day of school, we will review the regulation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Flushing International High School takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services extremely seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a 2018-19 CEP 72  covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. --When a parent enters the school they are greeted by a parent welcome poster conspicuously posted outside the main office. --When a parent enters the main office a language ID guide is clearly posted at the security desk as well as in the main office. --At the new parent orientation meetings parents are provided with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Copies of the guide are also distributed to parents at the four parent conferences throughout the school year. In addition, copies of the guide are posted in the main office where translations are made available as needed. --Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. Our parent coordinator provides this information to parents at several points throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors hold an orientation for new parents twice a year in September and in February through the Parent Association which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at all four parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and in May. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services the school will assess the answers parents provide in the school survey about whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. Parents who attend monthly PTA meeting will be asked to provide feedback on how well the school is providing parents with both written and oral translation services. In addition, whenever our parent coordinator communicates with parents she will request feedback on ways to improve communication and availability of translation services. We also have a focus group of parents that our parent coordinator works with to gather regular feedback on our services. 2018-19 CEP 73 
