2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q264 School Name: ACADEMY OF FINANCE AND ENTERPRISE Principal: VICTORIA ARMANO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy of Finance and Enterprise 24Q264 342400011264 9-12 School Number (DBN): 30-20 Thomson Avenue Long Island City, NY 11101 718-389-3623 Phone Number: 718-389-3724 Fax: Victoria Armano varmano@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Victoria Armano Jessica Herrera Irena Jovanovski Victoria Armano N/A IvanaJovanovski HanaTanovic Western Queens District Information Geographical District: 24 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, N.Y. 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-866-7396 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: ipender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-225-2020 Fax: 718-391-8320 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Victoria Armano Jessica Herrera Irena Jovanovski- President N/A NadiraTanovic IvanaJovanovski HanaTanovic N/A AmandaDevivo SimranKaur *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Teacher Member/ Staff Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hariklia Lymberopoulos Member/ Staff Teacher Ritchie Bevans Lavina Moorjana Shivnani SabedaHaniff NadiraTanovic Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Academy of Finance and Enterprise is committed to providing opportunities for our students to excel academically across all subject areas. Our students are exposed to a Career Technical Education (CTE) based program which prepares them to compete in the financial market and business world. Our school offers two CTE tracks in Finance and Entrepreneurship which provides internships in many facets of business. Our students develop technological and business skills that can support them to pursue careers in business and financial institutions. We encourage our students to take College Now courses that are going to provide them with the foundation to meet the challenges in college and beyond. Our school offers rigorous courses in Trigonometry, Pre- Calculus, Calculus, 2018-19 CEP 9  Chemistry, Physics and AP courses in all subject areas. Our culturally diverse school community is affiliated with Community-Based organizations such as Citigroup, Viscogliosi, NAF, Junior Achievement, Virtual Enterprise, NY Cares, Big Brother / Big Sisters of New York City, Pencil, Futures and Options, Vesque Partners, Ivy Key, Kweller Prep, and many others. These organizations enhance our student’s personal growth, leadership skills and integrity. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise High School (AOFE) is a Title I School-Wide Program. The economic status of the students and their families at AOFE varies. This school year 65.1% of the students receive free lunch based on the October 31, 2016 register. Our school works with the families that are placed in temporary housing. The students that are in temporary housing are provided with a support system through our Guidance department. These students are provided with at-risk counseling services and their families are guided to reach out to organizations within their community. AOFE received an A in the school’s progress report for five consecutive school years from 2008-2013. In the school year 2013-2014, our school received a Well-Developed rating in our Quality Review. Our school data has maintained a consistent graduation rate of 90% and above. The student attendance rate has been 90% and above for the past 13 years. The AOFE community of dedicated staff, students and parents has supported our school’s success. Out of 405 NYC High Schools that were ranked, AOFE was ranked #127 by the US News and World Report, “New York’s Best High Schools". AOFE serves and works with Hunter College and Queens College student teachers. The purpose of this committee is to form a dialogue between Queens and Hunter College to support their student teachers. The dialogue includes ways in which we can prepare and support student teachers who are entering the profession. We also have an advisory board that contributes in supporting us with an insight on how we support our AOFE students through College Now. AOFE is affiliated with Baruch College and LaGuardia Community College. This collaboration can help our High School students explore options available to them through the College Now program. One of the teachers at AOFE was selected to participate in the TESOL certification program that is offered at Hunter College. The teacher assigned to the program will work toward their TESOL certification. Queens College offered an Administration program and provided a scholarship for one of our AOFE teachers to pursue her Administration degree. One of our teachers was selected to the Administration program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have approximately 72 Special Education students at AOFE. We provide our students with the resources they need to support them academically. All our students are being served through Integrated Co-Teachng or through SETTS. We are also providing our students with related services that are aligned to the student's IEP. We have approximately 65 ENL students at AOFE. The ESL teacher reviews the NYSESLAT scores of all our ENL students through ATS. The ESL teacher prints the REXH scores that showed the historical records of all the students that took the NYSESLAT. The ESL teacher uses the PUSH-IN or PULL-OUT (PIPO) method to support her students acquire the academic skills to succeed academically. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 90 percent of our 9th graders earned enough credits to be on track for high school graduation. 90% of our 10th graders earned enough credits to be on track to graduate from high school in four years. Our student’s graduation rate for school year 2016-2017 was 94.3 percent. Our student’s graduation rate within six years was rated 97 percent. In the school year 2013-2014, AOFE students successfully completed approved college prep courses. The percentage of students that graduated college ready was 86.2 percent. AOFE has 74 percent of the its graduates that are in enrolled in college or other post-secondary program within 6 months. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise has integrated the elements in the framework where we have made the most progress in the rigorous instruction and collaborative teaching. Our teachers are committed to support our diverse student population across the subject areas. As a result of teacher teams and grade team leaders across the departments, we have increased our regents passing rates and graduation rates. Teachers at AOFE have guidance meetings on a weekly basis to discuss students that are at risk of not accumulating credits. The guidance department makes phone calls to the parents of those at-risk students. The guidance department arranges case conference meetings to support the academic needs of the students. Our teachers are provided with professional development on a weekly basis. The workshops are aligned to the diverse needs of our students. We have prioritized throughout our observations (MOTP) that we must align our instruction through the Common Core Learning Standards. We partnered with Teq Equipment to support our teachers best practices across the subject areas. In order to further improve our instruction, we would like to focus on our PPO Reviews and recommendations from the last two years. We want to ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core State Standards and/or content standards. We want to develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching. The instruction will be aligned to the curricula, and engaging students through technology, hands-on activity and meeting the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. The key areas of focus will be to integrate reading and writing across the disciplines. AOFE teachers will develop a portfolio aligned to the CCLS that will integrate reading, writing and research skills for all students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q264 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 598 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 6 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 72.2% % Reduced Lunch 4.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 51.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 97% 92.9% 55.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 89 68 21 92.5% 9.5% 13.4% 4.2% 25.6% 4.0% 4 31% 4.9 N/A N/A 100% 97% 96.7% 56% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise High School (AOFE) is constantly modifying the curriculum to support the skills that students need to master through the Common Core State Standards. As a school community, we have made changes in our English curriculum by using excerpts from EngageNY. In addition, we purchased the Collection Curriculum to reinforce the literacy shifts that are aligned to the CCLS. The Collection Curriculum has been implemented across all grades. We have implemented the literacy components with the literacy textbooks across the grades. The Mathematics department selected workbooks that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. Our students have shown improvement in Algebra & Trigonometry regent's scores. We are working very closely with the Math Department in Geometry. The Administration is closely observing how Geometry is being implemented in our classrooms. AOFE has invested in the purchasing of AMSCO & AP books, software and workbooks to support the implementation across Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, AP Calculus AB, Pre-Calculus and AP Statistics. We hired two new teachers to support the math department. The Mathematics department is also providing rigorous curriculum to students that are advanced such as AP Calculus AB, AP Statistics and Pre-Calculus. On the 2016-2017 PPO, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.1 Curriculum  The findings indicated that the curriculum is aligned to the CCLS across all grades and subject areas.  Academic tasks are planned and refined using data and student’s work.  The curriculum maps provided evidence that the school develops rigorous academic tasks through the adaptations of Engage NY and Common Core aligned textbooks.  The curriculum maps are being modified to include essential questions, performance indicators and assessments in reading and writing.  The school portfolio projects promote higher order thinking skills with students conducting hands-on activity, research and writing with projects that are connected to the global world. On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.2 Pedagogy:  The Quality indicator stated that the school leaders and faculty embraced a clear set of beliefs which builds consistency with regard to teaching practices and student’s ownership of work product across the school.  The teacher’s usage of the Danielson's Framework for Teaching allowed multiple pedagogical approaches.  The findings of the teaching practices which were aligned to the Common Core supported students to engage in high level discussions. 2018-19 CEP 13   The instructional shifts need to be sufficiently embedded across all departments to provide opportunities for all learners to produce rigorous work products. AOFE strengths are: ● 4.2 Teacher teams participated in professional collaborations and distributed leadership structures that foster reflection as well as provide opportunities to examine data on inquiry teams allowing for collaborative input on curricula and teaching practice. ● 3.4 Our school culture promotes high levels of expectations for all staff through multiple structures and a culture of reciprocal accountability. Our school orchestrates many opportunities to inform our students and parents through monthly bulletins, an Advisory Board, workshops, Engrade Pro, School Messenger, Safety Meeting, monthly Principal’s Meetings with the PTA and monthly School Leadership Team meeting. AOFE areas of improvement are:  The Academy of Finance and Enterprise teachers will be provided with professional development through the School Development Committee.  The English department will be provided with the Collection Curriculum and the literacy books across the grades with a student bundle for every student. Professional Development has been provided by McGraw Hill publishing.  Team Leaders across the grades will meet with the departments vertically and horizontally on a weekly basis to support instruction that is aligned to the CCLS. Teachers are attending workshops to support their best practices throughout the school year.  The Mathematics department will meet and discuss how they are going to support the Common Core Curriculum to support the mathematics shifts in Geometry and Trigonometry.  We want to increase the number of students that receive CTE certification for SY 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 85% of the teachers will have aligned the English and the Math curriculum with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will engage students through inquiry-based questions, explorations, oral discussion to increase rigor and understanding the CCLS concepts. Teachers will engage students in writing skills across the content areas through the portfolio. We will measure the progress of the Algebra 2/Trigonometry, Geometry and English through formative and summative assessments and student’s work product. The item analysis will guide the teachers to concentrate on the skills needed to align the curriculum to the CCLS. The teachers will measure student's progress through cycles to identify the progress that students are making across the marking periods. Students will take the January and June Geometry, Trigonometry and English regents that will showcase the student's performance. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Borough Field Support Center Mathematics Achievement Coach, Assistant Principal of Mathematics 1. Professional Development offered to teachers from the Teq online and the Department of Education consultants. Mathematics Teachers Sept. 2018- Jan. 2019 (Term 1) Feb. 2019- June 2019 (Term 2) 2. All teachers will be versed on the pedagogical shifts demanded by the Common Core Learning Standards 3. All teachers will analyze the EngageNY.org website curriculum resources to aid in their lesson planning. 4. The department will use the EngageNY.org resources to modify the curriculum that are suitable for our school. 5. All eight mathematical practices will be discussed at Inquiry meetings and ongoing Professional Development within the Math department. 6. The Math department will purchase workbooks and AMSCO books that are aligned to the CCLS to support the math shifts in mathematics. The workbooks were provided for Algebra and Geometry for all students. 7. The Special Education and ELLs students will be provided with academic support to make sure that they are able to understand the content. The school will provide regents prep and tutoring sessions during the day to support the diverse needs of our students. The circular 6 of teachers will be used to provide support to the students that are struggling in the classrooms. 8. Students that are under-credited will be provided with regents prep to help them with the content. We are going to also provide these students with Peer tutoring to engage them in collaborative learning. Teachers facilitate small group and individual tutoring during extended and regular school day hours. All students Sept. 2018- Jan. 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principal of Mathematics, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 15 The Assistant Principal of Math will give frequent presentations during the school year to the Parent Teacher Association regarding curriculum updates in mathematics. The AP will communicate to parents about the changes that are occurring within the mathematics curriculum at open houses, parent teacher conferences, and outreach organizations within our community. The Assistant Principal of Math will update the Parent Coordinator with changes in the mathematics curriculum on a monthly basis. Parents of all students Assistant Principal of Mathematics, Math Team Leader, and Parent Coordinator. February 2019-June 2019 Sept. 2018- Jan. 2019 February 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We provide our parents with support through the Guidance Department, Parent Coordinator and Teacher workshops. We conduct a Family Night orientation in September and May in which teachers present a PowerPoint Presentation on the syllabus, curriculum and strategies on how to support their children across the content areas. Once a week we conduct case conferences were we invite the parents, students and teachers to create an action plan to support students academic and social-emotional progress. The Parent Coordinator provides monthly workshops to support and guide parents with the following topics: College and Career Readiness, High School Requirements, Engrade, SAT & PSAT Preparation, FAFSA, CUNY application and College Board/ Khan Academy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax-Levy: Coverage for inter-visitation of classes on a weekly basis. Tax-Levy: Circular Six Professional Periods. Professional Periods will be used to support students in small groups. Tax Levy and Title III: Per-Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, math teachers will utilize mid-module assessments and formative assessments for every module. These assessments will test for effectiveness within curriculum development as evidenced of the data accumulated. All teachers will provide monthly cycles through their marking periods to determine the growth of their students through data analysis. By the end of June 2019, teachers will fully incorporate practices in their lesson plans. Teachers will link Common Core Standards within the curriculum as evidenced by the Measure of Teacher Practice reports through ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The teachers will conduct teacher-made assessments and data analysis to assess the progress of their students. Teachers will create a plan of action to support the academic needs of their students. The teachers are providing assessment across the content ( Algebra, geometry and trigonometry) areas through Schoolnet. The data indicators will be used to identify the weaknesses and strengths of the students that are aligned to the CCLS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The AOFE has reviewed the school survey for the SY 2016-17 which determined that 78% of the students, parents and teachers felt supported across the disciplines. AOFE wants to increase this Supportive Environment category by 85% by implementing programs to support the classroom, students and the school culture environment. The school celebrates Respect for All Week, where they develop activities and lessons with the teachers and the guidance department. The lessons are co-taught with the guidance department to support tolerance, respect, and inclusion. We have determined that we have to integrate lessons for the LGBT community that will be provided by the guidance department. We are going to use the Character Curriculum, Peer Health Exchange and the Life Skills Program to enhance social responsibility, tolerance and acceptance of all groups including ethnic, religious and gender groups across the grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85 % of our teachers will notice when students are under stress, or having emotional difficulty. English classes will incorporate Character Curriculum, Peer Health Exchange and the Life Skills program elements in the classroom. Students will be provided with assessments and surveys to identify that they are learning the components to build character to succeed in our school community. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will participate in Respect for All professional Development. Teachers and counselors will provide workshops for parents. All parents and teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teacher will use the resources provided in the Respect For All binders. Grades 9-12 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers will be provided with the Peer Health Exchange Program lessons. Grade 10 Teachers will be provided with the Life Skills lessons . Grade 9 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Guidance Department and Parent Coordinator. Teachers and the Guidance Department personnel Teachers, Guidance Department and Principal Teachers, Guidance Department and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be provided with workshops that are aligned to the Peer Health Exchange Program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. AOFE has received the resources of the Peer Health Exchange Program through a CBO. The Life Skills program are also provided to the school by a CBO. The Respect For ALL lessons will be provided by the Guidance Department to the teachers. The school has purchased the resources to support the Respect For All initiative. A schedule has been provided to the teachers and parents about the three programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 19  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, AOFE will monitor the progress of the lessons by conducting a school survey to review the impact the three programs will have in our school community. The student government that is represented by all grades will meet with the Principal twice a month to discuss school activities. Teachers will monitor the three programs: Respect for All, Peer Health Exchange and the Life Skills lessons on Fridays. Teachers will conduct surveys on a monthly basis to gather student's feedback. The Guidance Department will review the three programs in February of 2018 to identify the skills the students have learned from Sept. 2018 to February 2019 and February 2019 to June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Quality Review Results, School Survey and the School Quality Snapshot. The teachers will monitor the surveys that are provided by the three programs which are the Respect for All, Peer Health Exchange and the Life Skills program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing the Item Analysis from the Common Core ELA from June 2018, we have identified our strengths, areas for improvement and benchmarks that are necessary for students to succeed on the ELA Common Core. We will implement these findings into our curriculum and assessments. In reviewing the 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot High School. 1. Teaching practices will be aligned to the curricula through the use of Collections. 2. AOFE teachers will use the teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English or native language where appropriate, writing development through argumentative essays and portfolios. Teachers will consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in the ELA curricula. 3. Student’s portfolio and work products will reflect high level of student thinking and participation across the subject areas. Areas of improvement are : ● The 2017-2018 passing rate for the English Language Arts Regent’s exam was 95% for the CC English Standards. We want to prepare the students for college readiness to make sure that they know how to use the MLA and APA style that will be needed for college readiness. ● AOFE teachers implemented the Collection curriculum to support the literacy skills to improve our Regents scores across the subject areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of the teachers will refine all CC English Language Arts curriculum and assessments. This goal will be measured through formative assessments, predictive (School net), and diagnostics tests. All units and lessons will be aligned to Collections. The literature circles will reinforce the literacy shifts that are aligned to the CCLS. The item analysis was reviewed for January 2018 and June 2018 in order to strengthen the literacy skills. 2018-19 CEP 21  2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. All teachers will be provided with the Collection curriculum that is aligned to the CCLS. Teachers Sept. 2018-January 2. All teachers will create argumentative essays and text-based analysis and response tasks aligned to the CCLS during common planning. 3. The English teachers will reinforce the MLA and APA style to reinforce the college writing skills. 4.. Assistant Principal of English will review implementations during classroom observations that are aligned to the ELLs and the SWD based on the academic needs of the students. Teachers facilitate small group and individual tutoring during extended day and regular school hours. The Assistant Principal of English will present information to parents regarding the ELA Common Core Curriculum to our ELLs and SWDs. The presentations will be geared to parents during PTA meetings, Open Houses and parent community events such as Saturday’s meetings once a month. 2019 February 2019- June 2019 All students Sept. 2018- January 2019 February 2019- June 2019 Parents Sept. 2018- January 2019 February 2018- June 2019 ELA teachers, Generation Ready Consultant, Assistant Principal of English Teachers, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal of English, ELA teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title III Per-Session Generation Ready Consultation Tax Levy Assistant Principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of the teachers will increase the coherence and rigor of assessment tasks that are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) as evidenced through a review of student’s work such as portfolios, argumentative essays, and literature. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The English teachers will use Mock Regents exams, assessments and portfolios through the disciplines to support students through the CCLS. The teachers will use data analysis to review how the students are performing through the marking periods. An action plan will be provided by the teachers to show how they are going to support the academic skills of their students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation recommendation, we will refine and build on this year’s instructional focus and PD around multiple entry points and teaching practices to ensure that teachers strategically provide multiple entry points and differentiate the lessons to challenge students in their learning. The students result in producing meaningful work across all subject areas. On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.1: 1. Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. 2. Across classrooms, teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English and/or native language where appropriate, and routines) consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student’s work. 3. Across classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation across the diverse students. On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.2: 1. Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curricula, thus providing actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. 2. The school uses common assessments to determine student progress towards goals across grades and subject areas. The results are used to adjust curricula and instruction. 3. Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs. Teachers will use exit slips to assess for understanding and to reteach content that students are having difficulties. After reviewing the Advance School level MOTP summary for the 2017-2018 school year we found that our school’s area of strength is growing and developing professionally. Our review also revealed that our areas of weakness are in the area of 3B: Using questioning and discussion techniques and 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. We have 63 % percent of our teachers rated as effective. 37% percent were rated as highly effective. We want to support the effective teachers to become highly effective through professional development and Advance reports. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of the teachers will have participated in bimonthly professional development in order to incorporate multiple entry points and differentiate their planning and provide high level questions and discussions. We will measure the progress of this goal through ADVANCE observations. Teachers will integrate technology across the subject areas and infuse questioning and discussions through their lessons and units. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in professional development on Mondays once a week. Teachers Sept. 2018- 2. During Common Planning time, teacher teams will view instructional videos and analyze their low inference data using the Danielson rubric and the Teq online videos. 3. Professional Development will be conducted by teacher leaders and administrative support centered around the revision of lesson plans, units and conferences focusing on questions and discussions. 4. Teachers will participate in peer observations in order to refine and strengthen teacher practice. 1. Multiple-entry point strategies specific to ELLs, SWDs, SIFE, and over-aged, under-credited students will be addressed during professional learning experiences. 2. Teachers will bring samples of student work to analyze with the instructional teacher teams. 1. Parents are informed about MOTP updates through information sessions in School Leadership Team meetings and Advisory Boards. 2. The Assistant Principals present MOTP requirements at PTA meetings and parent workshops. 3. Parents will be provided with monthly workshops that pertain to the CCLS skills that our students need to develop in reading, writing, speaking and listening skills through technology. January 2019 February 2019- June 2019 Teachers Sept. 2018- January 2019 February 2018- June 2019 Parents Sept. 2018- January 2019 February 2019- June 2019 Assistant Principal of Supervision in content areas, Teacher Leaders, Borough Field Support Center Achievement Coaches and Generation Ready Consultants Borough Field Support Center staff specialist in the areas of ELLs SWDs, and student support. Administration, AP Supervision of Content Areas, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy: Circular Six duties Tax Levy: SBO Professional Learning Time schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 85% of the teachers will understand multiple entry points and differentiation will be evaluated through observations, instructional artifacts and student performance. Technology will be integrated through the lessons and units to reinforce the CCLS across the subject areas. The Administrators will differentiate learning opportunities for teachers performing at different levels of mastery as part of their next steps for teachers based on observations and post-observation conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The teachers will provide the administration with lesson plans that have multiple entry points and differentiation is evidence in their lesson planning. The Advance observations will be provided to the teachers to guide them through the process. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise reviewed the 2015-16 School Quality Snapshot to determine that 84% of the parents, students and teachers responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties. The administration and the School Leadership Team also reviewed the School Survey for SY 2015-16. We want to increase the Strong family and community ties to help students perform academically across all disciplines. We are also creating workshops for our Special Education parents and students to help them transition from Junior High School to the High School school environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, we want to increase 90% of our Strong-Family and Community Ties with teachers, parents and students. We are going to measure the goals with surveys that will be provided throughout the school year. The goal will be achievable by providing workshops to parents and teachers that aligns to their needs. Students will be provided with educational trips and with academic support programs during school and after school hours to help them succeed academically. Parents will be provided with workshops during the week and weekends to support them emotionally to help their children succeed academically. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will be provided with Professional Development within our school on Mondays. Teachers will also attend workshops on the weekends or during the week. Parents will be provided with workshops that are aligned to the disciplines. It is important to inform parents of the resources they should be using to support their children academic goals such as SATs, ACT, Regents Prep, FAFSA, and CUNY application process and many other workshops. Students will be provided with support through outside organizations such as SAYA, Exploring Program, NY Upbound, JA, VE, DECA, Big Brother & Big Sister, NY Cares, NFTE, Regents Prep, ER / Peer Tutoring, Transition Programs, Life Skills, and Peer Health Exchange Programs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, and CTE organizations. Parent Coordinators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Administration. Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselor, College Advisor, and Parent Coordinator. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have various CBO's that are supporting our parents, students and teachers. Peer Health Exchange, Big Brother & Big Sister, Elevate, and Brain Power. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The AOFE has outside organizations that are providing the services through a CBO. Students will be provided with a schedule from September 2018 to June 2019 with all the programs that students can participate throughout the school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 30  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will monitored how students are participating in any of the programs that are being provided in our school through a CBO. We will have presentations and surveys from CBOs about the programs they are offering to our students such as the Exploring Program. We will monitored the teachers Professional Development through surveys and communicating with them throughout the observations in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. AOFE will monitored student's progress by creating surveys to evaluate how these programs are creating strong community ties that will increase the academic skills of our students. Teachers will be able to discuss with the administration how they are supporting our students to succeed emotionally and academically through the surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Incoming 9 th grade students who scored at levels 1 or 2 on their 8 th grade ELA assessment/HS formative assessments. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the school day with additional support after school and on Saturdays. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students are provided with the Wilson program to support their reading skills. ELA classes are given to the at-risk students through small group instruction. Students who have failed the New York State Regents Examination in ELA receive support through small group instruction through Regents Prep. ELL students receive additional support in ELA one-to-one via the push-in model of ESL instruction. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. Incoming 9th grade students who scored at levels 1 or 2 on their 8th grade ELA Assessment receive an evaluation. The evaluation will be used to provide at-risk students with the Wilson program. The Wilson program supports students with their reading levels. Students are given support via strategies in vocabulary, writing and reading interventions. Teachers provide scaffolding and additional resources in order for students to make progress. Students who failed the New York State Regents Examination in ELA receive individualized tutoring based on their English Regents Item Analysis. Students are also provided with Regents Prep to support them with the reading and writing literacy skills. Specific emphasis is placed upon students’ 2018-19 CEP 32  Mathematics Students who have failed the Regents exams in the area of abilities to determine importance in the texts that they read across the Collection curriculum. Additional focus is given to test-taking strategies as well as student writing in response to specific prompts. Periodic assessment tools assist the teacher in analyzing the progress being made by his/her students and students’ readiness to move onto higher levels of comprehension. The activities are tiered to reflect the various levels of student achievement that may exist in one class. The lessons are differentiated in terms of the various difficulty levels of the text including vocabulary presented. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered daily during a professional period by various teachers throughout the day. Summer School Students are identified by their failure report to meet course requirements. These students have the opportunity to recover credits and retake the ELA Regents in August or January. At-risk students are identified by the use of Cohort data. Students receive additional classes in the respective Our method of delivery is extensive. We offer small group Small group instruction is held during the day and 2018-19 CEP 33  Mathematics. Students that scored a 1 or 2 in the 8 th grade mathematics assessments. Regents tutoring occurs on Saturdays. Our Peer Tutoring Program occurs during the day and after school. instruction through teacher professional assignments mostly in groups of 6 students. Saturday Regents tutoring classes (small group) and peer tutoring in the student center (one-to-one.) Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered by the teacher during a professional assignment. disciplines of Integrated Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra2/Trigonometry after failing the NYS Regents Exam in any one of the math subjects. Our math inquiry group focuses on maximizing techniques to ensure success for all students by providing Regents Prep and after school tutoring. Summer School – Students are identified by the failure report to meet course standards. Students can make up credits by attending summer school. We identified students that can retake Regents exams and the at-risk students identified by cohort data. Summer Camp will be provided to the students that have failed the Geometry Regents exams in June. This is additional from summer school. This is the second consecutive year that we support our students to excel in passing the regents exams. Saturday Regents Tutoring Program Circular 6R Tutoring – delivered to individual students or groups of 6-10 students. Students are given a diagnostic assessment and Item Analysis is created. This leads to 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Students who have failed Regents examinations in the area of Science. targeted tutoring, individualized, according to student’s progress and data. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to individual students or groups of three to six students in need of extra help or assistance in the content/subject areas during the teacher’s professional period according to Circular 6R. This service is offered during select periods of the day and is subject to programming constraints (teacher/student availability.) Make-up Lab – is delivered during the school day, one day per week for Living Environment and Chemistry courses. Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays will be used to support the labs. Extended Day – is delivered on a selected after school schedule and includes a course of study across the disciplines. For Students in Living Environment and Chemistry – students are given support via strategies in vocabulary, writing and reading interventions in the sciences to increase positive student outcomes on Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. Make-up Lab s – is delivered through whole group instruction. Living Environment Exam Prep – Students who have failed the New York State Regents Examination in Living Environment receive support through whole group and small group instruction. Extended Day – Regents Prep and Saturdays are provided to support the individual needs of students. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. Make-up Labs delivered during the school day or during after school hours. Living Environment Exam Prep – Services are provided during the school day with additional support during after school and on Saturdays. Extended Day – Services are provided after the school day, Summer School – delivered during the day. Students are provided with instruction in groups, and one-to-one instruction. Summer School – Delivered via whole group, small group and individualized instruction. Saturday Regents Tutoring Program for students in Living Environment and Chemistry – Delivered via whole group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Make-up labs are provided to 2018-19 CEP 35  Social Studies Student who have received a Level 1 or 2 on the 8 th grade ELA/ HS formative assessments students to support them academically. Before the school day, during the school day, after school and on Saturdays. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, purposeful grouping, pull out and push in models. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. NYS Science assessments and labs, Students are given support through tutoring during professional periods Circular 6 assignments. Students are also given support through an academic intervention team and all students that are scheduled to receive standardized testing are given a personalized education plan by the guidance counselor. This plan allows the student to set goals and benchmarks for themselves and receive skill and content development for the regents. Student progress is also assessed through formative, interim and summative assessments which enable educators to develop a prescriptive support plan for each individual student. Circular 6 Tutoring – Delivered to individual students or groups of three to ten students in need of extra help or assistance in the content/subject areas during the teacher’s professional period according to Circular 6R. This service is offered during select periods of the day and is subject to programming constraints 2018-19 CEP 36 Guidance Department – Services provided as whole group, small group and one-to-one. Guidance Department - Services provided are delivered during the school day. We also provide mock interviews and transition programs during after school hours. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified by the guidance department and teachers through the failure report or data. (teacher/student availability.) Students are provided with Regents Prep support along with in-class instruction for Global History and Geography, United States History & Government, Participation in Government and the Principles of Economics. Guidance Department Coordination of after-school tutoring performed by various departments. summer school referrals, daily attendance calls, Engrade, phone log entries, Group Guidance lessons, Pupil Personnel Team, meetings, guidance case conferences, parent/student conferences, teacher conferences, attendance meetings, dean’s referrals for guidance outreach, review and monitoring of cohort data, referrals of outside agencies (CBOs), PM School Program such as the YABC, Recovery Program, Student assemblies increased support services to specific target groups including Ells, economically disadvantaged, Black, Hispanic and SWDs. Use of NYC Schools Account to identify 2018-19 CEP 37  target groups and monitor and track data. School Psychologist, Social Worker, Related Service Providers, etc. Manage and complete Triennials including Educational Planning, Committee meetings with outreach to students, parents and staff. As needed, reopening, updating and evaluating student cases through the Annual Review Process. As needed, management of the MDR process and the creation of a Behavioral Intervention Plan for each student. Participation and consultation with PPT including general education guidance counselors, social workers and teaching staff. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are twenty students that are in Temporary Housing at the Academy of Finance and Enterprise High School. We want to support them emotionally by providing them with resources such as At-Risk Counseling, in-house computers, and the tools to help them succeed academically. We are also providing our students with the Elevate Program that will help students with College Readiness skills to 2018-19 CEP 39  succeed academically. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The students that are in temporary housing will be provided with the school uniform and the basic supplies to succeed academically at AOFE. The school will provide TI 84 calculators for the students to be able to take the rigorous courses such as Algebra, Geometry, & Trigonometry. Students are provided with at-risk counseling by the school counselors. The school will provide tutoring sessions within the school hours. The parents will be provided with prevention services through Community Based Organizations to support them and provide guidance and structure in the home. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP 40 N/A 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Administration and the Guidance department actively engages in conversations with CUNY, SUNY and Community Colleges as well as private universities such as Pace, Hofstra, and NYU. These partnerships take place during the school year where these organizations participate in the Advisory Board. We observe our classes with student teachers from Hunter College, Hofstra University and from Queens College which are also part of student teaching and the new State requirement Program. This process helps us identify highly qualified candidates and recruit them for future positions. Some of these candidates are hired as substitutes and others to permanent positions. We also identify vacancies in the Open Market and conduct thorough interviews as well as classroom demonstrations where a team of administrators, teachers and students are able to observe and provide feedback to the Principal regarding the candidates. All ATRs assigned to our school are interviewed when vacancies are available. We also review all teachers’ licenses and work with our Program Office so that they teach within their proper licenses. We provide professional development utilizing Title I funds as well as other ESL Bilingual grants. In order to support and continue to develop our highly qualified teachers, we provide individualized professional development utilizing services from DOE & CTE consultants. Our cabinet discusses strengths and weaknesses of teachers and creates a yearly PD plan designed to address areas of need. The DOE and CTE consultant provides support to teachers and aligns the Common Core State Standards with the curriculum maps, lessons and the instructional expectations for the school year. The Advance ratings and review with the teachers helped create an effective plan of expectations across the subject areas. We are also currently working with our Borough Field Support Center to inform us about the new hiring restrictions. The teachers receive training by the administrators to support professional development through the Danielson's Framework Rubric. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide MOSL training bi-monthly along with Circular 6 and modified scheduled meetings with staff and the Administration. The teachers and staff members are provided ongoing Danielson's Training and instructional support plans through the network and consultants. The Principal and Assistant Principals have attended several meetings with Borough Field Support Staff to enhance high quality instruction for staff members. 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 43 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5B Section 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 201,783.00 0 0 0 2,617,850.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 44   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Academy of Finance and Enterprise HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy of Finance and Enterprise HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 48  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 50  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In the 2018-19 school year, Title III instructional funds will be utilized to continue the Academy of Finance and Enterprise's after school and Saturday Academy supplemental program which will engage ENL students in reading and writing activities to supplement their ENL classes during the school year from November 2018 through June 2019. The activities will include but will not be limited to preparing for the NYSESLAT and the Regents exams. The program will differentiate between the different levels of the ENL students (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding). Resources will be provided accordingly based on the students' needs. There are a total of 37 ELLs students which consists of 8 Emerging, 20 Expanding, 9 Transitioning. Our Title III Language Instruction Program focuses on providing additional support in ENL and across the content areas through small group tutorial services. We plan to have an after school and a Saturday program to provide support to the ELL students. This program will meet after school on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 3:00PM to 5:00PM. The Saturday Academy will be taking place from 10:00AM through 1:00PM from November 2018 to June of 2019. The purpose of this program is to provide assistance with homework and projects and regents prep. We will have two licensed ENL teacher providing support to our ENL students. We will have content area teachers providing support across the content areas. Students will meet twice a week to attend an after-school ENL program in order to improve upon their English skills. The goal will be for them to meet the HS English requirements in order to pass the English Regents. The weekly sessions will be two hours long and will last from September 2018 through Regents Week in June 2019. The ENL teacher will use resources such as workbooks from Perfection Learning, Prentice Learning, and Finish Line. Students will receive academic intervention in order to succeed in their deficiencies. There will be guided reading activities aligned to the students' reading levels by using book collections and libraries. All ENL students have been provided with resources such as workbooks to prepare them for the PSAT and SAT exams. All ELL and SWD students are provided with the PSAT exam on-site on October 10th, 2018. The results are provided to the students and they are provided with a workshop to guide them through the SAT preparation process through Khan Academy. The ENL teacher enriches the ENL program with cultural activities such as visits to the library, different ethnic restaurants, and a trip to Ellis Island. Students are required to complete a portfolio every school year across all content areas. The portfolio project will reinforce reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills across the content areas. This year's theme is Balance. AOFE will provide an After School Regents Preparation Program. The purpose of this program will be to assist individual ELL and SWD students with Regents Exams preparation. Also, we want to help those students that are behind in credit accumulation by rescheduling them for the course to fulfill high school credit requirements. We will have a one-to-one meeting with family and students to discuss language acquisition progress and credit accumulation. These meetings will be held on Tuesdays from 2:40 PM - 3:55 PM on an ongoing basis from September 2018 to June 2019. We will discuss the following items: credit accumulation, language acquisition, academic progress, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores, strategies to support language acquisition at school and at home, and next steps to continue academic progress. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The NYSESLAT books and materials will be used to strengthen students' reading, writing, listening and speaking skills across the subject areas. By doing this, we will develop an individualized improvement plan for all ENL students. The previous NYSESLAT scores, Reading Diagnostic Exam, and the EDAT will be used to align instruction and target the specific areas and modalities in which students need the most support in their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. Emphasis will be placed on improving writing and speaking modalities. The Instruction will be provided in English. Students will be supported by a Licensed ENL teacher. The ENL teacher will use ENL methodologies across the four modalities. There will be a content area teacher for each subject area to support all content areas such as Math, Science, English, Global History, and U.S. History. The students will be provided with Common Core Learning Standards curriculum to support the academic needs of all ENL and SWD students. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: To support teachers in the development of strategies that will help ENL students become more exposed to the English language. Teachers will become familiar with phonemic awareness, reading fluency, including oral skills, vocabulary development and reading comprehension strategies in an effort to aid ENL students in becoming academically literate. September 2018 /June 2019: Target: 40 Teachers (All teachers at the Academy of Finance and Enterprise) Duration: 80 minutes on Mondays X 4 times a month = 320 minutes (As part of the weekly professional development program) Topic: Overview of NYS TESOL; ENL Modifications; Educational Programming Presenter: Ms. Cruz, ENL Teacher The ENL teacher will be attending professional development sessions offered by the UFT, DELLSS, and Queens North Professional Learning Opportunities (EDAT; Nuts and Bolts, ELL Liaison Meetings). These professional development sessions are provided to the teacher at no cost to her. She also attended the 3rd Annual UFT cELLebrating conference and the 2018 New Teacher Week this year. The ENL teacher will attend these workshops to support best practices that need to be implemented in her classroom and build capacity across the content area teachers. She will turnkey the material and provide a presentation on the NEW strategies being implemented with ENL students. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Parental involvement is at the core of student success. Supporting the parents of ELL students can be challenging, especially because of language factors. Since the majority of the ELL students in our school are Spanish-speakers, we have made a great effort to hire bilingual Spanish-speaking staff (School-Aide, and Parent Coordinator). On-going activities: September 2018- June 2019 September 2018: Target: 40 parents Duration: 80 minutes Topic: Family Night: ELL Parent Orientation Meeting to discuss ELL Program features, requirements and options. Providers: Sinai Cruz, ENL Teacher; Victoria Armano, Principal; Ramiro Castellanos, Spec. Ed; Juana Santiago-Fahim, Parent Coordinator Rationale: School staff, including the Parent Coordinator will attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings (e.g. SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, Title I Parent Committee, Monthly PTA Meetings) will share information and respond to parent questions and other inquiries. Schedule: On-going: September 2018-June 2019 Duration: SLT: 3 hours monthly, Title I Parent meeting: 60 minutes; Title I Parent Committee: 60 minutes; Monthly PTA meeting: 90 minutes; Parent-Teacher conferences: 180 minutes Rationale: The Parent Coordinator and Ms. Cruz will provide support to parents of ELL students by conducting monthly workshops. These workshops have the purpose of providing parents first hand information on school resources, strategies, and ways to monitor student progress. On-going Activities: November 2018-June 2019. Duration: 45 minutes each These are the Topics provided to our AOFE parents: The Road to College: October 2018 FAFSA Applications: October, November, and December 2018 Scholarship Application Process: October, November, December 2018 CUNY & SUNY Application: November 2018 - December 2018 Using the Internet: Setting Up Accounts on Engrade Pro to support the academic progress of their students: September 2018 - May 2019 Accessing School Resources: Engrade Pro, School Messenger: September 2018- June 2019 Presenter: Juana Santiago-Fahim, Parent Coordinator, Victoria Armano, Principal, Sinai Cruz, ENL Teacher Rationale: To provide parents with strategies to deal with daily situations and ways to support their children's emotional, social and academic development: Duration: 90 minutes each Workshop on Time Management and Resources to Support Wellness Learning Difficulties: Early Detection and Ways to Help Children: November 2018 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Detecting Depression and Anxiety in Children: Understanding Causes, and Helping Techniques, December 2018 Improving Communication with Adolescents: January 2019 Literacy Skills: What are some strategies that can help my child improve his/her reading, writing, and math skills: November 2018- June 2019 Each workshop will be at no cost to parents. Presenter: Western Queens Consultation Center Soft Skills by Celestin We will support ELL and SWD students with the soft skills needed to be able to compete in a global economy. There will be an on-site workshop provided for 80 minutes for individual grades. There will also be an accompanying book provided to all students. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 11, 363.67  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teachers will be provided with per-session to support the NYSESLAT and Regents Prep across the content areas. Currently the Per Session rate for teachers is $50.13 N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 3,000 Guided Reading Books; Library Books; Bilingual Dictionaries; NYSESLAT preparation books; ELA Regents preparation books Educational Software (Object Code 199) $12.00 per child Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 12,366.00 Read 180 + Math 180 Diagnostic Tests N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Academy of Finance and Enterprise HS Borough Queens School Number 264 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Victoria Armano Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sophie Kerbeykian Teacher/Subject Area Victoria Franzese Teacher/Subject Area Ramiro Castellanos Related-Service Provider Dave Cunanan Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Milton Javier Coach type here School Counselor Jessica Herrera Parent Tais Oro Parent Coordinator Juana Santiago Fahim Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 601 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 61 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.15%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used at AOFE to assess early literacy skills of the ELL students are the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and Teacher-created Assessments. ELL Periodic Assessment and PSAT scores can provide teachers with students strengths and weaknesses across the four modalities. To determine literacy skills we review the middle school ELA & Math scores. Teachers also create their own formative assessments at the beginning of the school year to identify the strengths and weaknesses in the students. These exams are used to identify the four modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing. The data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT provide insight as to the levels of classifications. The ELL Periodic Assessment results indicate that students need to be supported in writing and reading comprehension skills. The PSAT scores provide information regarding students' reading and math scores which can be instrumental in supporting students' academic needs. The ENL teacher reviews the data and prepares lessons that are going to support the needs of our ELL population. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  AOFE provides an after school and a Saturday program to support students academically. The ENL teacher and the content area teachers provide support across the curriculum. We have a Team of Counselors, Teachers, Assistant Principals and Principal that monitors the progress of our students across the subjects. We are constantly tracking the academic needs of our students across the grades. The ENL teacher reviews the scores of the NYSESLAT across the modalities and shares the strategies with the content area teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review with a team of educators including the ENL teacher the success of our programs using cohort data, graduation trackers, item analysis on Regents exams, credit accumulation data and attendance data. Our ENL program has been successful as evidenced in the progress made on student regents exams, credit accumulation and graduation rate of our ELLs. Because we are constantly reviewing and evaluating the effectiveness of our programs, we have been successful in moving our ELLs academically and supporting them as they make progress. According to our state measures, we have met AYP for the past several years including for our sub-group of ELLs. Our teachers review the academic progress of our students across the marking periods to identify the progress of our ELL students across the subject areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At AOFE we provide NYSESLAT review and preparation classes that support our ENL students. We also support our students with Regents Prep classes to ensure that they are able to meet the demands of the Regents exams across the four content areas. In addition, we provide Academic ER on Wednesday, Thursdays and Fridays to support our students in all subject areas. The ENL teacher provides tutoring before and after school during the week. She also has a Saturday program to support students in reading and writing skills across the subject areas. AOFE provides Regents prep on Wednesdays, Through Fridays and on Saturdays from 3:00PM-4:00PM or 3:00PM-5:00PM. Saturdays will be at 9:00AM-12:00PM. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] AOFE reviews the NYSESLAT data from 8th grade. The ENL teacher reviews the results of the four modalities of the NYSESLAT. She also provides the content area teachers with the results of the NYSESLAT so that the content area teachers can use the data to support the ELL students in their classes. The content area Teachers review the Regents scores and the Regents Analysis to support students in their academic skills. The Guidance Counselors and the ENL teacher work together to plan an action to support the needs of our ELLs students. The ENL and the content area teachers are able to design a plan of action to support the students that are struggling academically. On Tuesdays from 2:40PM-3:55PM, we invite students as well as parents to attend Case Conferences to support and create a plan of action for students that are struggling academically. Case conferences are provided to students on a weekly basis to guide students to be accountable for their learning. AOFE prepares students to discuss with their assigned teachers their academic progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Upon review of the NYSESLAT 2016 data, it shows the student data as: 4 Transitioning, 27 Expanding, 27 Commanding. The ENL teacher will support the students with reading comprehension and writing skills. We have found that writing skills needs to be supported across the content areas. According to our trends analysis, we must emphasize reading and writing across the subject areas. The data reveals that the majority of ELL students are struggling with reading comprehension and writing skills. 2018-19 CEP 61  The ENL teacher has selected books that are going to support the two modalities which are reading and writing. The ENL and the content area teachers have selected various books that are diverse to engage students in reading and writing skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At AOFE, we have a LAP team that discusses how the ELLs students are performing across the grades. We disseminate the ELLs data in our Guidance Meetings, Department Meetings, and Vertical Team Meetings to support the academic needs of our students. The ENL teachers provides feedback to her content area teachers and infuses strategies that are going to support the reading and writing skills across the content areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Under Part 154, entering students will receive 1 ENL standalone period, 1 period of ENL with a dually licensed English and ENL period and one period of Integrated ENL and Social Studies. All students will be programmed keeping them on grade level with their peers. Emerging students will receive 1 ENL standalone period, 1 period of ENL with a dually licensed English and ENL teacher. Transitioning students will be placed in an on grade level English class with their cohort. That class will be taught by a dually licensed English/ENL teacher or it will be integrated with one English teacher and one ESL teacher. Advanced students will be placed in an on grade level English class with their cohort. That class will be taught by a dually license teacher English/ENL teacher or it will be integrated with one English teacher and one ESL teacher. Commanding students will receive integrated instructional (ENL/ELA or content area) every other day in the content area that we identify as having the greatest need based on June 2015 Regents test data. The standalone ESL program is designed for ENTERING and EMERGING ELLs. Students are grouped in heterogenous levels For the INTEGRATED English instruction, the ESL teacher delivers her services in the English classes - grades 9-12 - using the push- in model. The students in these classes are grouped heterogeneously with mainstream and special Education students. The ENL teacher also provides the Push-out model for students that need the extra support in reading comprehension and writing development. Mrs. Kerbeykian, has the ESL certification to provide the Commanding level students with two periods (90minutes) a week of integrated ESL services for 2 years. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in our ESL classes exceed the number of minutes required in ESL and ELA as they are programmed to receive ESL instruction daily. 1 Period is equal to 46 minutes. Students receive additional NLA support for 46 minutes per day as stipulated in CR-PART 154. Entering students receive one period of Standalone ESL, 1 period of ENL/ELA , and 1 period of ENL/Social Studies. Emerging students receive 1 period of Standalone ESL and 1 period of ENL/ELA. Transitioning students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA. Expanding students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA and Commanding students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA. 2018-19 CEP 62  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL students are provided in the content areas with assistance across the disciplines. Supplementary materials such as workbooks, glossaries, maps and other types of scaffolding are provided for the students across the disciplines. ENL and the content teachers meet on a weekly basis in order to identify successful strategies for students. ENL teachers provide additional support in the classroom through vocabulary building in the content areas and through the use non-informational readings. These methods are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards as they address the need for non-information texts. The ENL teacher also works with the English Teachers in the Collection Curriculum. The content area teachers receive ongoing support and guidance to successfully integrate ENL strategies into their lessons, moving students toward proficiency in the target language. At the beginning of each term, classroom teachers review NYSESLAT results and design instruction according to language needs. The ENL Teacher reviews on a weekly basis how are the ELL students are performing academically and through the guidance meeting we discuss the academic performance of our ENL students. We also provide Regents Prep to support our ENL students across the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During the admissions and articulation process, students are given a placement exam. They are then interviewed by Ms. Kerbeykian, ESL Teacher and Mrs. Palacios, Spanish Teacher. After students are assess, they are placed at the correct level of Native Language Arts. The Spanish LOTE and they also take AP courses in order to appropriately evaluate students in their native language throughout the school year. Formative and Summative assessments by the classroom teacher are also utlized. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In order to provide support to our SIFE population, we have a plan in place to promote a challenging, rigorous, culturally relevant and linguistically sensitive educational program for these students. Our SIFE students, once identified, will be assessed through a uniform diagnostic test to identify their literacy and academic needs. We would assess these students using the ELL Periodic Assessments, which will assess their literacy and math levels. It also identifies areas of weakness that can be addressed. We will also use the PSATs benchmark assessment to assess their reading, writing and math scores. The system is also beneficial in helping us to monitor their progress. SIFE students will be placed in the appropriate level sequence to allow these students to have more time on task in the development of their language skills. In addition, any available data on the performance of these students on NYS Regents examinations and NYSESLAT will serve to target areas in need of improvement and be used for instructional planning. NYSESLAT results are reviewed by the ESL coordinator and the Principal of ENL when the scores are released in the fall. Students’ programs will be revised to meet the NYS C.R. 154 mandated number of units of instructional support for ELLs based on their NYSESLAT scores and parental selection. In addition, data is shared with the bilingual content area teacher and our entire staff via faculty and department conferences so that teachers could more effectively support these students in their classrooms. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status, as per CR Part 154.2. B. Newcomers are carefully assessed and placed according to our admissions policy into appropriate levels of ENL taught by licensed ENL teachers. Newcomers who are placed in beginner classes receive the requisite minutes of instruction per day and support from professionals who understand their need for visual and kinesthetic approaches in a communication-based classroom. C. ELLs who require more than four years to graduate receive special attention from our guidance counselors, LAB/BESIS coordinator and Assistant Principals who work collaboratively together to create an individualized plan of action in order to assist students in credit accumulation and passing the Regents exams required to graduate. These students are placed in Regents Prep classes as well as our Saturday Academy. Required services and support will correspond to ELL’s ages and grade 2018-19 CEP 63  levels. In the classroom, teachers will work with intervention programs such across the disciplines in order to help students progress. D. Once long-term ELLs are identified and an extension of services is requested, these students are supported both academically and socially in an effort to help them transition into the mainstream. Teachers integrate NYSELSAT preparation into regular instruction, and our course of study for advanced ENL students includes challenging material and activities across all four language modalities. In addition, students who have failed the Regents examination are placed into literature-based Regents review classes and registered for Saturday Academy, attendance at which is factored into final grades. Our Regents review classes are structured according to the skills tested on the ELA Regents and, therefore, the instructional planning places listening, reading and writing at the forefront of the curriculum. Finally, students have the opportunity to participate in co-curricular and extra-curricular activities, such as the Repertorio Español and trips to the theater to experience performances in English and Spanish. This important component in the curriculum provides students a social context in which to improve their skills in authentic language settings. Our ELLs who receive special education services and our holdovers benefit from Saturday Academy through more time on task and support in completing their class assignments. Moreover, our ESL teachers communicate regularly with our resource room and CTT teachers about individual student progress. Parents are requested to meet with the teachers on a weekly basis through Case Conferences if students are not performing academically. E. Former ELLs are invited to continue to participate in the same activities that they were a part of while ESL students. These include, Saturday and After-School Academic intervention, trips to Repertorio Espanol and College For Every Student activities. In addition, test accomodation are provided for former ELLs for two years after they test out. As per CR-Part 154.2 students will also receive mandated services. Former ELLs (Commanding) receive 1 period of ESL/ENL per day. These students also receive testing accomodations across the subjects. Differentiated instruction is delivered for these students by providing graphic organizers, charts, glossaries, translated version of texts when possible for newcomers. In addition, one-to-one tutoring is available during the day and after school to provide additional support. We also provide Academic ER to support students across the subject areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize scaffolding strategies such as graphic organizers, resources such as supplemental texts, adapted texts, study guides, gallery walks and multi-sensory experiences. Teachers are also aware of students' IEP goals in order to help them develop a plan for achieving this goal. Teachers use materials that emphasize vocabulary in order to accelerate English Language acqusition. Teachers provide tutoring afterschool to support intervention programs that provides students with an opportunity to read non-information articles and advance their reading levels. Our ESL coordinator, Ms. Kerbeykian and Principal of ESL, Ms. Armano meet regularly with our IEP Liasion, Mr. Castellanos in order to ensure that Special Education ELL students are receiving programs that contain the appropriate services required by their IEP and are in compliance with CR-Part 154. Student's IEP's are regularly reviewed and parties are notified of any changes in the IEP that may affect the program of the student. Decisions that affect Special Education ELLs are done colloboratively with the team and the Principal to make sure that their needs are met. If the IEP mandates bilingual instruction then the team will work together to ensure correct placement or a paraprofessional is provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of Ells collaborate with Special Education teachers in order to provide students with support in their classes. In addition, teachers are aware of IEP modifications and implement them in the classroom using differentiated instruction. ELLs are placed in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) content area classes as indicated in the child's IEP. The SIT Team meets on a weekly basis to discuss how our ELLs Special Education students are performing academically. The ELL-SWD students are in the least restrictive environment to guide them to attain the English Language Proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 64  Based on the item analysis for Regents exams and interim assessments, Title III instructional funds will be utilized to continue the Regents Prep, Saturday Academy and after-school tutoring. Our Regents Prep, which will be conducted from November to June, consists of content area teachers providing support to all the 50 ENL students at AOFE. There will be 20 students per class, for 2 hours a day and the Saturday sessions are from (9:00AM-11:00AM). Classes that are offered for ENL students include English, Math, Earth Science, Living Environment, Global History and Geography, and American History. The classes are geared toward students who have not passed or are in danger of not passing the Regents State exams related to these subjects. The AOFE ELL Saturday Academy is staffed by licensed teachers in ENL, math, social studies and science, with a preference given to the very same classroom teachers of these students. English Language Learners who are programmed for Regents review classes are automatically registered for the Regents Prep and Saturday Academy, where they can improve their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. We will be able to offer after school instructional sessions two to three times per week for a session of up to two hours. The immediate impact of this tutorial program on students and the extensive time it provides to model testing accommodations in their real time frame makes our ELL Saturday Academy a key component of our AIS program for ELLs. The core objective of the program is to provide ELLs with the skills necessary to achieve a 65 or better on the Regents exams , at a rate on par with their English proficient peers. In our internventions, we utilize and reinforce the native language in order to help students build literacy in the target language as well as offer additional support in the Native Language classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be implementing the Collection curriculum that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. Teachers will be able to create exams with Common Core aligned questions and the students can use technology to understand the reading activities listed in Collection. The Teachers also requested workbooks in Algebra, Geometry to support students through the CCLS and to evaluate how the students are performing academically. Pre and Post tests will show growth and the data provided from the program will be analyzed to differentiate instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we will not be discontinuing and programs for ELLs, however we are struggling to support all the afater-school program with the limited funding. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All our ELLs are awarded equal access to all the programs as they are given the opportunity to take electives in our Business, Art sequences. ELLs are also given the opportunity to participate in all AP courses as well as AP Spanish Language. Ells participate in various school trips and after school activities, such as sports and clubs. Supplemental services for ELLs include the Academic ER, which takes place after school, Regents Prep, and Saturday Academy. ELLs also participate in the College Now program that allows students to participate in taking college now courses. All ELLs are provided with mentoring activities, college trips and leadership and mentoring summits. Currently we have partnerships with Repertorio Espanol, Big Brother & Big Sister, NY Cares, Citi Mentoring that ELLs participate in which allow students to work with adult mentors. Students also have the opportunity to participate in drama through the Possibility Program. In reviewing attendance at these events described above, we have determined that ELLs do fully participate in these school programs. Our students also participate in the ELL support program at La Guardia Community College through the STEM program. ELL students are also invited and participate in the College Now Program that we run in partnership with Laguardia Community College and Baruch College. Students in that program have an opportunity to take college level courses while still in High School. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ENL students are given the opportunity to simultaneously learn English and computer skills such as PowerPoint, Reasearch and Business. These skills are necessary to support the new Common Core Aligned curriculum. This year, we will continue support our students with technology by providing a computer cart that students can use to write the portfolios. The Collection curriculum will be use across the grades in the English classes and staff development is provided to support teachers in the use of technology. Teachers will be abe to differentiate with the ENL students and guide them to exceeed academically. 2018-19 CEP 65  In the Native language classes, teachers will provide students with authentic novels and literature in order to support the native language of our ENL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In addition to receiving ENL services, our ELLs receive challenging, rigorous academic instruction in their native language. Students in Native Language Spanish classes sit for the Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Composition exam in their third year as well as other AP courses. It is our belief, and research shows, that challenging students in their native language will strengthen their second language as well. Our ELLs are very successful on these AP exams. Our ELLs students first Advanced Placement Spanish course that they take in our school, we find that their success motivates them to take other AP classes. This allows them to have a college experience while still in High School. We also motivate them to take College Now courses at La Guardia CC and Baruch College. We have also found that because students are analyzing literature in their Native Language class, they can transfer the skills and many of the terms to their English Literature classes. This strengthens students’ academic learning in both the native class and English class. Material in the native language classes include the use of authentic novels and literature. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In providing services for our ELLs students, we factor both age, grade level in order to provide both classes and instructional materials that are appropriate for their age, grade and academic needs. Materials may include adaptations of novels, books in our English curriculum for beginning ESL students or technology that they can listen to the informational text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ENL students are given the opportunity to simultaneously learn English and computer skills such as PowerPoint, Reasearch and Business. These skills are necessary to support the new Common Core Aligned curriculum. This year, we will continue support our students with technology by providing a computer cart that students can use to write the portfolios. The Collection curriculum will be use across the grades in the English classes and staff development is provided to support teachers in the use of technology. Teachers will be abe to differentiate with the ENL students and guide them to exceeed academically. In the Native language classes, teachers will provide students with authentic novels and literature in order to support the native language of our ENL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year, we provide a Parent and Student Orientation. Parents are given the opportunity to learn about the services available to their children for both ESL and school wide programs. The student orientations centered around providing students with information about programs and activities available to them at our school. It also includes workshops given by teachers on goal setting and strategies for success. Both parents and students are introduced to school personnel and given a school tour. Our Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator and College Advisor provides monthly workshops to support our ELLs parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Since the majority of our ELLs speak Spanish, ELLs whose native language is Spanish are given support through our Native Language Arts Program which include electives in our Spanish AP. We want our ELLs students to take rigorous courses in Math and Science were they are academically successful. The College Advisor also seats with the students to guide them in taking courses in College Now that have no bearing credit but are to support writing 101 in college. The College Focus program helps students attend 4 year colleges. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 CEP 66  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is embedded into our school culture and philosophy. Because we have many ELLs and former ELLs , we find that it is important for our entire staff to participate in training that will help to support ELLs. Our staff including teachers and assistant principals have participated in workshops offered by our Office of English Language Learners and several other workshops that support Native Language Arts and content area instruction. In addition, our ENL and content area teachers of ELLs have attended workshops sponsored by BETAC including workshops that focus on Regents Preparation for ELLs. Our Network also continues to provide our school with whole group or one on one Professional Development opportunities via our Support Specialist. Our Assistant Principal of ESL together with our LAB/BESIS coordinator provide teachers and staff that includes paraprofessionals, psychologist, secretaries, parent coordinators with workshops in utilizing data such as NYSESLAT reports in order to implement ESL methodology, analyzing student data, review of parental options and Title III services. The parent coordinator receive training by the Assistant Principal in their role in the process of identification and compliance letters so that they have a better understanding of how to assist the ENL coordinator as she performs these functions. All staff is given training on CR-Part 154.2 requirements. Additionally, Inquiry Teams, departmental and faculty conferences provide an opportunity for teachers to learn together and try new strategies to ensure the progress of our ELLs. Mr. Dale Worsely, Generation Ready also works with teachers in providing literacy strategies that will help struggling students. These activities include reviewing the Common Core materials from ENGAGE NY and writing units that include scaffolding and support for ESL students. Teachers will write units, implement and revise during the school year. They will use summative and formative assessments to determine the success of their units. We will continue to train our teachers in ELL professional development during PD days which occur in September, November, January and June. This includes CR-PART 154 requirements, appropriate resources for classroom, testing accommodations in addition to other workshops. Guidance counselors receive training on CR-PART 154.2 requirements and transitional placement from Principal of ESL, Ms. Armano and Guidance in order to help ENL students transition from the middle school to the high school. In addition, guidance counselors receive PD on appropriate resources for ELL students, accommodations and protocols for placement for Special Education ELL students. Records for Professional Development are maintained in the Title 3 binder. All teachers will receive training in order to meet the 50%/15% PD minimum. Teachers of ELLs are provided with PD at our weekly inquiry common teacher team meetings. With the new ENL/ELL model, teachers evaluate and modify curriculum during this time as well as provided outreach to selected students that the team has identified. Teachers focus on specific pedagogical strategies and learn how to provide multiple points of entry for sub-groups including ELLs. These activities support delivery of Common Core instruction because it gives teachers the opportunity to reflect on how ELLs learn and how they are providing ELLs with access to meaningful, engaging and cognitively challenging content. In addition, teachers attend MOSL PDs that are provided by our Generation Ready Consultant, Dale Worsely. Teachers are also offered ELL PD during faculty conferences and Professional Development Days. Teachers also attend PD offered by the office of ELLS such as the Bilingual Symposioum. The ESL teacher attends the NYS TESOL Conference 2018-19 CEP 67  annually as well as the TESOL Convention, Applied Linguistics and other workshops and conferences offered by the DOE, UFT and various colleges and universities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL Teacher and the Guidance Department reviews the academic needs of our ELLs. Transitional protocols are provided during ELL PDs. Student demographic data as well as NYSESLAT data is provided to teachers so that they can properly modify instruction for their ELLs. There is a Team Leader for every department to review how the students are performing academically and if the protocols that they need to follow. In the Guidance Meetings every Wednesdays teachers are able to discuss how the ELLs are doing academically or if there is a need for a Case Conference to meet with the parents. Workshops are provided to the students and parents to guide them on the graduation requirements. Teachers of ELLs are provided with PD at our weekly inquiry common teacher team meetings. Teachers evaluate and modify curriculum during this time as well as provided outreach to selected students that the team has identified. In addition, students attend MOSL PDs that are provided by our Generation Ready Consultant, Dale Worsely. Teachers are also offered ELL PD during faculty conferences and Professional Development Days. Teachers also attend PD offered by the office of ELLS such as the Bilingual Symposium. Records are maintained by the Principal's secretary. We also record all the PDs that our teachers are attending outside the DOE. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All Parents at AOFE, including parents of ELLs take part in our Parent Orientation conducted in September. During this orientation, parents are given valuable information that will help their children transition from the middle school to high school. During that same orientation, a workshop are offered specifically for ELL parents where parent options are discussed and parents have an opportunity to ask questions. Translation is provided to the parents in need of support. We involve parents in the effort to help ENL and bilingual students meet graduation requirements by providing translated materials on the New State Standards and Graduation Requirements and by holding an orientation for the parents of newly-arrived ELLs as described above. Orientation is ongoing throughout the fall and spring semesters to inform incoming parents and students of the Part 154 Regulations. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual in Spanish and English and works closely with the administrative and instructional teams. One of her primary goals is to formulate, translate and disseminate informational materials to our Spanish-speaking parents. These initiatives, together with a series of workshops (including gang awareness, road to college, financial aid for college (FAFSA), graduation requirements and parenting skills) have helped create a community of adults whose primary concern is the academic, social and emotional health of English Language Learners. As part of Title III funds, parents also participate in the ENL workshops. During these workshops, parents work with teachers to receive workshops that are going to support the academic needs of their children. They also learn basic technology skills such as, e-mail and internet resources. Parents of ELLs are also involved through the PTA and the SLT team. In addition to parent orientations, we will continue to hold mandated individual meetings with parents and LTP members as per CR part 154 requirements. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At AOFE we provide Parent Orientations, presentations at PTA meetings, Achievement Celebration Nights such as Honor Roll, Workshops by the Hispanic Federation and Saturday PTA workshops. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Fahim will help us to promote these events, provide outreach and notify parents and provide translation when needed. 2018-19 CEP 68  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victoria Armano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: AOFE School DBN: 24Q264 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Victoria Armano Title Principal Milton Javier Assistant Principal Juana-Santiago Fahim Parent Coordinator Sophie Kerbeykian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tais Oro Parent Victoria Franzese Teacher/Subject Area Dave Cunanan Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jessica Herrera School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ramiro Castellanos Other Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 10/24/17 2018-19 CEP 71 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Academy of Finance and Enterprise Superintendent: Elaine Li DBN: 24Q264 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Juana Javier Fahim Milton Parent Coordinator/LAC yes Assistant Principal/LAC yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The demographics of the school have been assessed by reviewing ATS reports and the Home Language Surveys (HLS) of the entire school population. The data of our ELL students needs to be reviewed by Mr. Javier and Mrs. Fahim our two Language Access Coordinators. The ESL teacher reviews the language needs of our ELL's students by reviewing the Home Language Identification Survey. The coordinators and the ESL teacher puts forth a plan of action to provide interpretation services when needed. Parents are being provided with written translation and oral interpretation through the use of technology such as the School Messenger system and by obtaining services from the Translation and Interpretation unit. Parents are provided with translators and interpretation services during Parent Teacher Conferences to improve the communication between parents and teachers. Parents can 2018-19 CEP 72  also request case conferences with their child's teachers and a translator is provided if needed. The Student Emergency Contact cards are updated in ATS to have an accurate information of our student population. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The Academy of Finance and Enterprise (AOFE) reviews the RCPL report from ATS. AOFE has 35.32 % of parents that speak Spanish, 47.74% that speak English, 3.8% Chinese, 3.9% Bengali, 1.75% Polish, 1.03% Arabic. Therefore, we have staff that speaks Spanish and school information is translated in the Spanish language. Other languages are addressed through the use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. These are some of the languages that are spoken by parents, English, Spanish, Portuguese, Bengali, Chinese, Hindi and Greek. Parents are informed from the time of admission during orientation as to the available translation and interpretation services. This information is also provided at the PTA monthly meetings and workshops. Information is also provided in the Student/Parent Bulletin. The school uses the School Messenger, which has the ability to send out translated messages. These messages are reviewed for accuracy by the Parent Coordinator. Therefore, phone messages go out to the parents in English and Spanish depending on the language the parent has indicated as their preferred language. The language needs and our school data is also discussed at the School Leadership Team meetings to determine the needs of our parent population and to determine what is required to improve parental engagement. In fact, the use of the School Messenger, Engrade, EChalk, and onsite translators by the staff has been implemented in response to their English Spanish Chinese Polish English 100% Spanish 100% 100% 100% Portuguese Arabic Bengali (Bangladesh) Hindi Greek 2018-19 CEP 73  request for better communication with parents. Nevertheless, mailings are still a preferred method by the parents and the school website. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Academy of Finance and Enterprise disseminates the following documents in English and Spanish. The information is also provided to parents through mailing and through the School Messenger. Incoming Freshman Orientation- June 2019 Open House Dates - September 2018 December 2018 School Calendar- on a monthly Basis September 2018-June 2019 Student/Parent Bulletin on a weekly basis. September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 74  Family Night- September 2018 - May 2019 Teachers present the Curriculum across the subject areas. Ells Meetings- September 2018 Incoming Orientation- June 2019 Open House- September 2018-December 1, 2018 Special Education Meetings- Monthly Basis Monthly School Calendars Parent -Teacher Conference announcements- September 2019, November 30, 2018 and March 1, 2018 Parents are provided with the flyers, letters in English and Spanish. The school has staff will translate the flyers and letters in Spanish. If we need to use the Translation Unit we will submit the documents ahead of the event. September 2018- June 2019 Parent -Teacher Conferences dates - November 20, 2018, March 8, 2019 and May 10, 2019 PTA meetings on a monthly basis SLT meetings on a monthly basis Engrade on a weekly basis E-chalk on a monthly basis NYS Testing schedules in January, June and August After-School schedules in November & December Portfolios schedules are distributed in September Portfolios Presentations are in March for all grades. Student/Parent Bulletin on a monthly basis September 2018- June 2019 Family Night September 2018- May 2019 ELL's Meeting- September 2018 Parents are provided with the flyers and the fact sheet in English and Spanish. The school staff including the Principal can translate the documents. If we need use the Translation Unit we will submit the documents ahead of the event. Parents are provided with the school calendar through the school website, PTA, Parent Teacher Conference and SLT meetings. The calendar is available across the school in 2018-19 CEP 75  PTC Dates- November 20, 2018, March 8, 2019, May 10, 2019 English and Spanish. Students/Parents school bulletin are provided in English and Spanish. The information is provided on a monthly basis. Parents are provided with the literature of the curriculum in English and Spanish. We have staff members that are able to translate the documents ahead of the event. The ENL Teacher is able to provide the Parents the documents in the parent's preferred 2018-19 CEP 76  The Regents exams: January, June and August- School Messenger language in English and Spanish. The documents will be translated with school staff members. If we need the Translation Unit we will request for the documents one month ahead. 2018-19 CEP 77  The school messages are automatically translated through the School Messenger. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parents are provided with written translation in English and Spanish through in-house school staff members and the translation and interpretation services that are provided by the DOE. When a parent requires translation services, these services can be requested either by the teacher, the parent or any other staff member by contacting the Translation and Interpretation Unit at 718-752-7373. A conference call is set up in an appropriate setting to ensure privacy between the parent and the translation unit. Parents are provided with numerous workshops in English and Spanish such as The Road to College in November, Financial Aid (November), and Common Core Standards workshops (September through May), Academic Intervention Services (December and May), Special Education meetings (Monthly meetings), English Language Learners Informational Meetings (September and November and May). Parents with other language needs can come to the school and plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 78  the Parent Coordinator will assist them with the translation services from the DOE. On Tuesdays we provide case conferences to improve the academic skills of our students through parental engagement. Parents, teachers and students are expected to discuss the academic strengths and weaknesses. As a team, we create an action plan to support the child's academic goals.The case conferences are translated to parents to improve the academic skills of our students. Parents meet with the Guidance Counselors during the school day.The College Advisor holds weekly meetings with parents to support the college selection process. AOFE has an open door policy in which parents are welcome to come to school whenever they require any additional information. Parent Teacher Conferences (PTC) are held in September, November and May. We want to support our PTC and we provide translators to support the needs of our parents and students. Parental Workshops: The Road to college- 11th graders- November 2018 Parents are provided with the workshop in English and Spanish. We have a personnel that speaks both languages. 2018-19 CEP 79  12th Graders: Parents and Students The material is also being translated within our staff. CUNY, SUNY and Private Colleges October 2018 12th Graders: Financial Aid/FAFSA November 6, 10 & 17 Common Core Curriculum Workshops- September 2018 & May 2019 Parent Teacher Conferences November 20, 2018, March 8, 2019 and May 10 , 2019 The Guidance Department also provides the parents with the CUNY information in English and Spanish. The CUNY applications is a hands on activity that we complete entire entire application process. The Guidance Department has assigned specific dates to support parents filling out the FAFSA application. Parents are spoken in their native language to guide them through the process. 2018-19 CEP 80  Every Tuesday: Case Conferences Meeting with parents and students to discuss the academic progress of students. Teachers provide parents support in understanding the Common Core curriculum. All the departments meet with the parents and go over the material in English and Spanish. Parent Teacher Conferences are supportive by using Translators from the Translation unit to support the different languages stated in the RCPL. The school staff also can translate when needed. 2018-19 CEP 81  On Tuesdays, we conduct case conferences to support the students that are not performing well academically. Parents and students are invited to attend a meeting with all his/her teachers. The meeting is translated by using staff members that speak the parent's language from 2:40PM-3:55PM. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. AOFE uses the school messenger to communicate with parents for any school events or emergencies. We have used Engrade to send messengers to parents in case we have an emergency. The CAASS system can be use by using text messages to inform parents if there is an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure2018-19 CEP 82  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellor's Regulation is provided to all the staff members through a workshop on the first day of school on September 5, 2018. All staff members were provided with the Chancellor's Regulation and the Translation service cards and phones. The procedures to facilitate parents and students with a translation documents was properly informed to all staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school has provided the staff members with a workshop on Chancellor's Regulation A-663. We want our parents to feel welcome in speaking their native language and understanding the academic needs of their children either through a school translator or through the DOE translation unit. Posters are displayed all over the school to welcome parents when they walk through the school. In the main office and security desk there is a guide if a parents needs to speaks a language other than English. The Language Coordinator will support the parent and guide them to receive the appropriate translation services if needed. All letters mailed to our parents are translated to support the needs of our parents. The parents are welcome to visit our school and we offer them meaningful opportunities in programs and services critical to their child's education. Common letters to parents such as school closures and exam notifications letters have been translated to engage parents in school community activities. The staff members have been provided with the Parents Bill of Rights, Brochures to help them understand that educating a child is a team effort. Mrs. Fahim, is the Language Access Coordinator she provides the teachers with the translation service card to help teachers maintain an open communication system with the parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent survey is reviewed by the teachers, students and the school leadership team. As a team we review our strengths and weaknesses to improve for the incoming school year. The Parent Coordinator provides Saturday workshops to parents to keep them informed of all the upcoming events such as CUNY application, FAFSA application, ESL services, Parent Teacher Conference meetings, Open Houses, Honor Roll activities, and Case Conferences. The Guidance Department provides workshops on the graduation requirements that pertain to our student population. 2018-19 CEP 83  The PTA conducts in-house surveys to assess the social and academic needs of our diverse student population. The survey can pinpoint the needs of the parents in helping their children succeed academically. We conduct monthly meetings to support parents and to review some of the curriculum that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. The Principal provides a Principal's Report on a monthly basis to inform parents of all the activities that the school will offered during the school year. The principal provides a school calendar with all the information for the school year and a Student/Parent bulletin that explains on a monthly basis all the events the school has for the school year. The Parent Coordinator sends out automated messages through the School Messenger system to inform parents of school events or activities on a monthly basis. The CAASS system emails parents or texts them every day to inform them if their child has attended school and the time they arrived. 2018-19 CEP 84 
