2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q266 School Name: P.S. / I.S. 266 Principal: AYANNA GREENIDGE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS/IS 266 342600010266 Pre-K - 8 74-10 Commonwealth Boulevard 718-479-3920 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 26Q266 718-479-2482 Fax: AyannaGreenidge agreenidge3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: AyannaGreenidge Denise Palmeri Racquel Chariah RacquelChariah&AyannaGreenidge N/A N/A GlynisHarrison District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street,Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-631-6900 Phone Number: 718-631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North L.I.C., NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AyannaGreenidge Denise Palmeri Racquel Chariah Kathleen Mione N/A N/A N/A GlynisHarrison Jennifer Andres TeresaFauvell Kathleen Nolan *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ShantriseKeller EricaLobosco Jaqueline Martinez Stephanie Povalitis MariceliSchiff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At our school, all students will be given the opportunity and guidance to achieve their maximum potential. Working collaboratively, teachers, parents, administrators and staff members will provide a safe environment and quality education for all students. Academic excellence and high standards are the goals for every student. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 266Q is a District 26 lottery elementary and middle school located in Bellerose, Queens. We have approximately 655 students from Pre-Kindergarten through Grade Eight. Our school population is comprised of a multicultural and diverse population of families (37% Asian, 25% Hispanic, 22% Black, 13% White, and 3% Multi-Racial or Other). The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 96.1%. 2.75% of the students attending PS/IS 266Q are English Language Learners (ELLs). The needs of these students are met through support provided by English as a New Language (ENL) service providers. 20.31% of the school population qualifies for Special Education Services. Our diverse student population requires that our approaches to student learning be diverse as well. Our approaches include not only meeting the academic needs of our students in appropriately-rigorous ways, but also meeting the social and emotional needs of our students. In an effort to meet grade-level standards, our staff works collaboratively to learn and implement best practices across content areas that are monitored and revised for optimal effectiveness. In an effort to prepare our students for the demands of College and Career Readiness, students at PS/IS 266Q learn to take ownership of their learning and to make connections to the real world. Teachers at PS/IS 266Q emphasize this belief by actively engaging in professional development collaborations within Instructionally Focused Teacher Teams to customize curriculum and teacher practices aligned with this focus. During the 2017-2018 school year, most professional learning focused on delving into the launch of the Teachers College Writing Units of Study, and an interdisciplinary project-based learning experience designed by Middle School content area teachers that students worked on across all subjects. This focus on writing allowed all teachers to utilize the Teachers College Writing Pathways rubrics as a common assessment tool. The collaborative efforts of our teacher teams has resulted in the design of student-led group work, tiered learning activities, and customized learning experiences. Classroom instruction reflects scaffolded learning with opportunities for enrichment and acceleration, questioning, and routines that provide multiple points of entry into the curriculum. A range of questioning aligned with Depth of Knowledge (DOK) is used in every classroom to provide students with opportunities to work towards deep and complex critical thinking. This allows our students to effectively organize their thoughts and consolidate their learning in reading, writing, speaking, and listening across all disciplines. This type of work also supports our beliefs in and integration of the Next Generation Learning Standards and alignment with the Framework for Great Schools. During the 2017-2018 school year, teacher representatives across all grade bands within the school came together to establish an instructional team focused on engaging in discussions within literacy. The intent of the collaborative meetings was to address the extent to which curriculum and instructional practices as described above are having a positive impact on teacher pedagogy and student learning. This work was brought to all teachers within the school community to begin identifying non-negotiables in an effort to work towards establishing a core approach to literacy instruction that aligns with our shared belief regarding how students learn best. During the current school year, two teacher teams will take leadership roles instructional work through our selection to participate in the NYC DOE Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP) and the NYC DOE Teacher Leadership Program (TLP). The thread that is woven throughout teaching and learning is our school's belief in growth mindset, a system that is embedded into our daily practice and evident across all Danielson Framework for Teaching domains. Teachers' ability to both plan and execute lessons through growth mindset has a direct positive impact on student achievement. Our families are invited into our instructional program through parent engagement opportunities such as Curriculum Night, PTA meetings, parent workshops, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Open School Week opportunities, Chat & Chews with the Principal, and the use of different learning management systems such as Google Classroom, and our transition from the Middle School use of Engrade to all students within our school community utilizing iO Education, including Skedula and PupilPath. Our parents work collaboratively with teachers to support student growth. Our parents also engage in the work of supporting our school with funding to purchase resources such as trade books, classroom center materials, online software subscriptions, and computer hardware such as iPads. In addition, the PTA is instrumental in providing funds to support meaningful experiences such as trips, assemblies, and student 2018-19 CEP 10  acknowledgement ceremonies. Together, we support the learning and celebrations of achievement both in and out of the classroom. School leaders, staff, and parents work together to offer our students enriching and engaging events and extracurricular activities such as our Fall Festival, Movie Night Under the Stars, music competitions, a drama program, a chess team, a debate team, a culture club, and athletics. At PS/IS 266Q, we believe in educating the whole child. As such, we believe strongly in supporting the social-emotional development of our children with as much passion and interest as is devoted to supporting our children's academic growth. Students in grades Pre-K - 5 have dedicated time to engage in social-emotional learning through the Sanford Harmony Program, which focuses on establishing strong bonds and positive relationships both within and beyond the classroom. With the commencement of the 2018-2019 school year, we have introduced an Advisory program within our Middle School, which utilzes the Overcoming Obstacles curriculum as a guide, and also provide space for the use of community building tools, such as Restorative Circles. The emotional intelligence of teachers and staff in the building was developed through the introduction of two of the RULER Anchor Tools developed by the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence during the 2017-2018 school year (Charter & Mood Meter). During the 2018-2019 school year, an Emotional Intelligence Team that has been established will continue this work, with the goal of the aforementioned tools being utilized to deepen the emotional intelligence of all adults in the building. Our plan is for the Anchor Tools to be incorporated within classrooms as an additional support for students before the end of the school year. Each year, our school looks forward to engaging in school-wide reading through our Community Read. This year, we will transition to aligning this practice with the Diversity and Equity initiative of focus within our district. As such, our school community will focus on one of the four pillars of focus during each quarter of the school year (Diversity, Equity, Democracy & Social Justice), and engage in the reading of "Pillar Texts" that explore each pillar in a meaningful and developmentally appropriate way for each grade band. Students in upper grades will continue to collaborate with students in lower grades through "Buddy Class" lessons to continue building community across grade levels within our school. We have also developed several other programs, such as Youth Alive (student leadership & community service), which affords middle school students the opportunity to grow and nurture school spirit. Our Tri-M Music Society highlights the importance of music in academics. During the 2017-2018 school year, we continued to expand our student membership in the Chess Club, Debate Team, Flag Football, Rising New York Road Runners, and Track. These extracurricular activities allow our students to have an opportunity to learn about good citizenship, and also exposes them to different paths towards college and career opportunities, while learning different academic, social, and physical skills. While we will continue our partnerships and affiliations with the community-based Samuel Field YMCA and charitable organizations like The Ronald McDonald House, during the 2017-2018 school year we also expanded our community connections by developing our relationship with "Beautiful Me - The Hance Family Foundation" and the 105th Precinct in our community. During the 2017-2018 school year, we utilized surveys and meetings with parents and guardians to elicit information about ways to incorporate them into the fabric of our school community in meaningful ways. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, it will be our goal to continue ensuring that our families are fully engaged in our instructional program, have input in meeting the needs of our diverse student population, and are excited to participate in family engagement activities as well. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body of PS/IS 266Q includes 2.75% English Language Learners and 20.31% students with special needs. Our ELLs participate in an inclusive learning environment in which they are fully immersed in the English language and are afforded the opportunity to learn alongside their peers. Students with disabilities engage in learning across in a range of placements, including general education classes with related services, integrated co-teaching classes, and self-contained classes. Students will continue to be afforded more opportunities to engage in learning in the least restrictive environment possible through the strategic design of programming to support flexible programming. 2018-19 CEP 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, our School Quality Guide data reflected the most significant gains within the element of Effective School Leadership. One focus of the Administrative Team that seemingly made an impact was initial steps towards establishing coherence, consistency, and alignment in systems, structures and instructional best practices across grades Pre-K - 8. Early in the school year, the Administrative Team engaged all stakeholders in discussion and action planning aligned with the Instructional Focus. After the second round of observations towards the middle of the school year, the Administrative Team analyzed evaluator report data, leading to the establishment of "Danielson's Instructional Core @ PS/IS 266Q" - a focus on strategic planning aligned with Danielson Framework for Teaching components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d. The impact of administrative support and teacher pedagogy in alignment with this work was monitored, and plans adjusted based on benchmark assessment data tracked utilizing Google Sheets within the school's Google Drive. Another focus of the Administrative Team was engaging teachers in collaborative planning with regards to both academic and non-academic initiatives within the building (i.e. Targeted Teacher Teams, the Student Acknowledgement Committee, and the School Branding Committee). Administration also valued the input of parents and guardians by collaborating in meaningful work within the context of School Leadership Team meetings, Chat & Chews with the Principal, presentations during PTA Meetings, and PTA representation within the School Branding Committee and 5th and 8th Grade Activities Committees. Several of the aforementioned forums also included collaboration with teachers and staff. The area of growth that has been identified based on varied forms of data (including building-level needs assessments, Advance observations and leadership feedback align with teaching and learning within the building), is Rigorous Instruction. Over the course of the history of our school, we have used multiple writing curricula. Initially, our school utilized the Teachers College Writing Project units of study (without the support of TC staff development). About five years ago, we adopted Ready Gen. After returning to utilizing Teachers College Writing units of during the 2017-208 school year, we have noted obvious trends in our student writing across all content areas with our Pre-Kindergarten – Eighth Grade school. Our data analysis included a review of specific elements of writing across grade levels and content areas, including lead, transitions, ending and organization. The most significant trend we discovered is that student work does not demonstrate a solid understanding of the structure of writing. We believe this may be connected to misalignment across grades within the teaching and learning of writing. As such, we plan to work towards the following focus question - How can we work to build coherence into our teaching practices so that we can establish a common understanding among teachers of a writer at the end of their journey in our building? Another area of focus was discovered based on the analysis of data from our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. In comparing the responses of students with those of teachers, significant misalignment became evident within the Rigorous Instruction element. For example, within the "Academic Press" section, "61% of students say that they are challenged in their classes," while "93% of teachers say that students feel challenged." Evaluator report data from Advance aligned with this discrepancy, as the average rating for Domain 3 ranged between 2.93 and 2.99, which is at the high end of a "Developing" rating. As such, during the 2018-2019 school year we will focus on improving the alignment between what teachers believe they are offering in terms of the level of challenge within the learning experiences that teachers are designing and executing, and what students are actually experiencing. We believe that if we craft a strategic professional development plan that will bolster teachers' ability to provide students with multiple entry points and utilize differentiation, there will be higher levels of meaningful engagement, greater opportunities for teachers to offer actionable feedback, and the needs of the range of learners represented within each classroom will be more effectively addressed. In addition, the Administrative Team has introduced the "Pedagogical Non-Neogtiables in Support of Danielson's Instructional Core", which provides teachers with guidance regarding best practices that should be evidence within their pedagogy. We have also identified a need for coherence and alignment across grade levels and departments in the utilization of a standard protocol to analyze student work within teacher teams. We hope that this will also increase the percentage of "teachers that say that teachers": (1) "are actively trying to improve 2018-19 CEP 12  their teaching", (2) "take responsibility for improving the school" & (3)"are eager to try new ideas" (71%). These measures are reflected within the Collaborative Teachers element. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q266 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 649 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 6 24 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 44 43 21 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 42.1% % Reduced Lunch 3.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 22.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 68 95.1% 11.2% 21.4% 19.9% 40.1% 2.9% 4 7% 7 52.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A N/A YES NO YES N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Analysis of the June 2018 ELA and Math Exams Instructional Reports reflects that students across most of our grades are performing above the citywide average: Percentage Points Above City: Grade Grade Percentage Points Above City: Overall - All Questions ELA Overall - All Questions Math +.04 +.01 +.07 +.04 +.14 +.08 3 4 5 6 7 8 3 4 5 6 7 8 -.02 +.01 +.13 +.02 +.18 +.02 The NYC School Survey score reflected in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicated positive results within the Framework Element of Rigorous Instruction with a score of 4.23. This score is significantly above the city average (+.54). In addition, positive percentage rates aligned with the "Common Core Shifts in Literacy" and the "Common Core Shifts in Math" were both quite high at 93%. However, other measures demonstrate a disconnect between teachers' perceptions of their practice and students' interpretation of learning experiences (specific indicators of greatest concern based on disconnect noted beneath each measure): * Academic Press - 68% Positive - 68% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically. - 61% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. - 69% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions on tests. 2018-19 CEP 15  - 59% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class. - 65% of students say that they work in small groups. - 93% of teachers say that students feel challenged. - 70% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions. - 70% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. * Course Clarity - 75% Positive - 65% of students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work. - 88% of students say that it's clear what they need to do to get a good grade. - 62% of students say that the homework assignments help them learn the course material. * Quality of Student Discussion - 79% Positive - 65% of teachers say that students use data or text references to support their ideas. - 74% of teachers say that students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers. - 93% of teachers say that students participate in class discussions at some point. In addition, the average rating for Advance Observation Data across Domain 3 (3b, 3c, 3d) was “Developing” (slightly below “Effective”) during the 2017-2018 school year: * The average rating for DFfT component 3b was 2.94. * The average rating for DFfT component 3c was 2.93. * The average rating for DFfT component 3d was 2.99. In alignment with this data, qualitative needs assessments conducted by instructional teams within the building highlighted the following trends: * Teachers struggle with utilizing and maintaining structures that result in consistently offering meaningful and actionable feedback. 2018-19 CEP 16  * Teachers are not consistently designing and executing learning experiences that include differentiation and/or the use of multiple entry points. * There is a need for coherence and alignment across grade levels and departments in the utilization of a standard protocol to analyze student work within teacher teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be evidence of greater coherence and alignment of instructional practices across all grades, including the consistent incorporation of multiple entry points, differentiation, and the use of small group instruction, as measured by a 5% increase in the average teacher rating for Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3c. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional learning opportunities will be offered throughout the school year to support teachers' ability to design learning experiences that incorporate multiple entry points, differentiation, and the use of small group instruction. These sessions, also aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core (1e, 3b, 3c & 3d) and the Pedagogical Non-Negotiables, will include professional learning activities such as studying professional resources, presentations by Administration, co-planning led by Teacher Instructional Leaders, lesson studies, and working through analyzing student work protocols. Outside staff developers, such as through consultants from the Center for Integrated Training in Education, will also be contracted to support the teacher team work. Intervention for students will be provided through small group Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Academic Boost Groups (ABG) with general education teachers, special education teachers, or speech teachers. Students will be pulled for small group instruction for 6-8-week cycles. Teachers will be selected to attend professional learning opportunities offered by the Queens North Field Support Center and Citywide aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core, and then share that information with grade/department colleagues as applicable. Teachers across Kindergarten through Second Grade will receive direct support for best practices within literacy instruction through their collaboration with our Universal Literacy Coach. Common assessment tools will be utilized to monitor student progress toward meeting grade-level expectations: * Reading: Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System * Writing: Writing Pathways Learning Progression based on on-demand writing Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teacher Instructional Leaders Students performing below grade level in reading, writing, or math Teachers 10/15/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Teachers, ABG Administrative Coordinator 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers K-2 Teachers & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Universal Literacy Coach & Administration Teachers & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers 2018-19 CEP 18 * Math: Go Math! Benchmark Assessments (K-2) & Periodic Assessments (3-8) * Social Studies & Science (6-8 only): Teacher-created DBQs assessed utilizing the "Structure" strand and "Elaboration" element from the "Development" strand Teachers will focus on the ways in which each unit of study within the Teachers College Writing Units of Study, regardless of genre, aligns with narrative writing in order to keep narrative writing "alive and present" all year long. This will also support students' continued improvement when assessed through on-demand narrative writing. Students will engage in meetings called "Scholarly Commentary" with members of the Administrative and Instructional Leadership Team during which the conversation will address students':  Perceptions of their learning experiences  Academic goals & progress towards meeting them  Quality of collaboration with their teacher(s)  Classwork, celebrating both strengths and potential action plans for growth Teachers & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Targeted Teacher Teams & Administration 10/1/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Instructional Leadership Team Students, Administration, Instructional Leadership Team Academic workshops for parents and guardians will be offered to support their understanding of what their children are learning, and ways to help them at home. Parents/ Guardians 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Teachers & Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and staff will offer parents and guardians learning opportunities that will unpack curricular units of study. This information will be communicated to families in a way that will make them aware of the standards, essential questions, and expectations for each unit of study. Additionally, teachers will share the checklists and/or rubrics for the units of study with families, so they may help their children achieve those goals at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Vision for School Improvement funding will be used to purchase materials to support this initiative. Funding will be allocated to ensure that substitute teacher coverage will be available for all teachers attending professional learning opportunities. Principal and Teacher collaboration around instructional initiatives have secured the Collaborative Action Research Project and the Teacher Leadership Program during the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 19  We have been given access to receive support from a Universal Literacy Coach in alignment with the criteria put forth by the NYC DOE in alignment with the Universal Literacy for All initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be some evidence of greater coherence and alignment of instructional practice across all grades, including the consistent incorporation of multiple entry points and differentiation, and the use of small group instruction, as measured by an increase of 2.5% in the average teacher rating when comparing the first and second cycles of observations reflecting Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) * Reading: Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System * Writing: Writing Pathways Learning Progression based on on-demand writing * Math: Go Math! Benchmark Assessments (K-2) & Periodic Assessments (3-8) * Social Studies & Science (6-8 only): Teacher-created DBQs assessed utilizing the "Structure" strand and "Elaboration" element from the "Development" strand * Advance Evaluator Report Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school has an Advisory Team comprised of Administration, the Dean, the Guidance Counselor, the SAPIS Worker/Youth Development Coordinator, the Social Worker, and the School Psychologist. The team meets on a weekly basis to discuss students in need of interventions and supports, the best approach to address the students' needs, and who will be responsible for executing the action plan. The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey data reflected an 86% positive rating within the Social-Emotional measure based on Teacher responses. The other measures reflected areas of concern, including the following indicators: * 58% of students say that most students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. * 52% of students say that most students follow the rules in class. * 58% of students say that most students pay attention when they are supposed to. * 59% of students say that most students work when they are supposed to. * 40% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. * 76% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. * 58% of students say that most students feel it is important to come to school every day. * 59% of students say that most students feel it is important to pay attention in class. * 46% of students say that most students think doing homework is important. * 53% of students say that teachers help them catch up if they are behind. * 58% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. * 63% of students say that teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work. * 61% of students say that teachers explain things a different way if they don’t understand something. * 45% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. 2018-19 CEP 21  * 62% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school. * 78% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. * 52% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. * 57% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of their race, religion, ethnicity, national origin, or citizenship/immigration status at their school. * 51% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of other differences, like disability or weight, at their school The average percentage of the indicators listed above is 57%. Three categories within the element were rated far below the district average: * Classroom Behavior (25%) * Peer Support for Academic Work (27%) * Safety (12%) Notable data from the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reflects the following: Code Level Infraction Description A24 3 A33 4 Shoving, pushing, or engaging in a minor altercation or similar physical confrontational behavior towards students or school personnel (e.g., pushing past another person), or throwing an object (e.g., chalk) or spitting at another person (for more serious physically aggressive behavior, see A34) Engaging in physically aggressive behavior other than minor altercations as described under A24, which creates a substantial risk of or results in minor injury A13 2 Using profane, obscene, vulgar, or lewd language, gestures, or behavior B08 1 Engaging in verbally rude or disrespectful behavior A07 1 Engaging in verbally rude or disrespectful behavior A18 2 Engaging in inappropriate or unwanted physical contact or touching someone in a private part of body. B24 3 Shoving, pushing, or engaging in a minor altercation or similar physical confrontational behavior towards students or school personnel (e.g., pushing past another person), or throwing an object (e.g., chalk) or spitting at another person (for more serious physically aggressive behavior, see B36) Count % of Total Incidents 80 23.67 26 7.69 23 22 20 17 6.80 6.51 5.92 5.03 16 4.73 2018-19 CEP 22 B07 1 Behaving in a manner which disrupts the educational process (e.g., making excessive noise in a classroom, library or hallway) 14 4.14 Infraction levels 3 and 4 above account for more than one third (36%) of all reported incidents. With the aforementioned areas of concern reflected in the NYC School Survey, coupled with the OORS data, it is clear that additional support and guidance for Teachers and Staff with regards to social-emotional learning, emotional intelligence, and progressive disciplinary and intervention measures are needed to foster a positive school environment for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be improvement in the alignment between teachers' and students' perception of the extent to which students feel supported and discipline is maintained as measured by a 15% increase in positive student responses on school-created surveys and the New York City School Survey, and a 15% decrease in the number of level 3 and 4 infractions as reflected in the Online Occurrence Reporting System. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ● Students will have the opportunity to reflect on their own learning and level of social-emotional development with the support of the Sanford Harmony (Pre-K - 5) and Overcoming Obstacles (6-8) curricular programs. ● Administration will strategically schedule weekly periods for Character Education (K-5) and Advisory (6-8). ● Students will engage in learning experiences through a Growth Mindset lens, and develop an understanding of how this can help them to consistently put forth their best effort and persevere in the face of academic challenges. ● Middle School students will be engaged in the work of learning and demonstrating the criteria for our Academic and Personal Behaviors Ethics Code (APEC) across classrooms. ● Students will be engaged in classroom and school experiences designed to help them to make real-life connections and hold them accountable for demonstrating these connections in their academic and personal behaviors. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Dean, Guidance Counselor, Youth Development Coordinator, Teachers, School Mental Health Consultant ● The Advisory Team will meet at least twice a month to discuss specific student social and emotional needs, and create action plans in order to meet student needs. Staff & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Advisory Team & Teachers ● APEC expectations will be included on school progress reports and report cards to communicate student progress with their academic and personal behaviors. Students demonstrating strength in this area will be publicly acknowledged through forums such as the Student Acknowledgement Ceremonies. ● Teachers and Staff will be engaged in professional learning in an effort to develop their level of emotional intelligence and it's connection to the social-emotional development of our students through the RULER Anchor Tools created by the Yale Center of Emotional Intelligence. All classrooms will have a Charter by November 2018. Teachers & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers Teachers & Staff 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Emotional Intelligence Team Students will engage in meetings called "Scholarly Commentary" with members of the Administrative and Students, Administration, 10/1/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Advisory Team 2018-19 CEP 24 Instructional Leadership Team during which the conversation will address students': & Advisory Team  Perceptions of their dedicated Social-Emotional  Learning Experiences/Advisory time Social-emotional goals & progress towards meeting them  Quality of collaboration with their teacher(s) & staff and the extent to which they feel safe and supported at school ● Students will have the opportunity to participate in a variety of school organizations and programs such as Youth Alive, Flag Football, Extravaganza, Drama Club, Chess Team, Debate Team, Rising NY Road Runners, etc. to engage them extracurricular activities that will allow them to develop their social and emotional skills in non-academic settings. Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Families will be engaged in parent workshops, Open School Weeks, and Curriculum Nights highlighting our Growth Mindset and APEC programs, as well as the Sanford Harmony social-emotional learning curriculum and Overcoming Obstacles life skills education program. ● Parents will be invited to participate in weekly parent engagement opportunities to discuss student academic and social-emotional progress, and work with the teachers, support staff and school administration to develop action plans to assist students with their growth and development. ● Parents will be given access to learning management systems (i.e. Google Classroom, Engrade, PupilPath) to communicate with teachers and to stay informed with student learning expectations, assignments and progress. Families will have the opportunity to ask questions, send messages, and communicate in real-time with school staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our teachers, support staff, school leaders, students and parent coordinator will work collaboratively with our PTA, and SLT to develop, monitor and support these practices. Teachers will utilize Sanford Harmony, Overcoming Obstacles, RULER Anchor Tools, and other appropriate resources to further their learning about supporting our students’ social and emotional needs. APEC rubrics and grading policies will be adjusted to reflect one system to monitor and promote student learning and development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. * School-created surveys aligned with the Framework for Great Schools and the NYC School Survey. * 2018-2019 NYC School Survey student and teacher responses (June only). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers worked through three cycles of professional learning and collaboration within Targeted Teacher Teams. A team focused on the Teachers College Writing Units of Study that were adopted during that year was established on each grade level across grades 1-5, and in grade bands for Pre-K - K and 6-8. The "Targeted Teacher Team Cycle 3 Feedback & Thoughts for 2018-2019 Teacher Team Work" survey reflected the following qualitative and quantitative data: * 88% Yes: "Was your team able to cycle through all four stages of the process ( <1> Deep Dive Into Curriculum, <2> Gathering Around Student Work, <3> Sharing Strategies, Tips & Tricks, <4> Action Planning & Bridge to Practice)?" * "Describe the impact that your collaborative work with your team has had on your individual planning and practice (i.e. new pedagogical moves, resources, technology platforms, etc.)." - "It has helped us align our rubrics and lessons to give students an opportunity to apply an assignment across curriculum. I look forward to do more of this next year." - "We are much better able to integrate relevant writing practices into our work and to infuse this writing into Google classroom." - "As I'm the only one teaching my subject I was able to take certain items from my team members and try and incorporate and customize these practices to meet my specific needs." - "i appreciated the time with my colleagues discussing how to make more meaningful rubrics." - "I have liked having the time to go through the TC units with my colleagues. I have been able to better figure out how to structure my work and have learned some new strategies." - "I have been able to expand my practice and have gained value by sharing in common practices and new ideas." - "Since we gathered and shared resources, it made it easier to have them at my fingertips for lessons. It also made me more confident in planning lessons, and I could see more clearly how I could differentiate for my students." 2018-19 CEP 27  * "Describe the impact that your collaborative work with your team has had on your own students (i.e. what shifts might be noticeable in your class(es) )." - "The students were engaged and motivated. They liked that they were able to make connections in all their content areas." - "I have noticed that the students have gained confidence because of the new strategies." - "Students know whats expected and have tools that will be taken with them through the upcoming years." - "They have been able to utilize new strategies and improve their writing." - "I believe our careful planning helped my students understand the components of an informative writing piece. When I do the post-assessment, I think the data will demonstrate a basic understanding on non-fiction writing that was not there earlier in the school year." - "I have tried different ideas that my colleagues have suggested and we have collaborated ideas about certain topics. Trying things in a little bit of a different way has helped the students and myself see and learn things in ways I might not have approached it before." - "My students flourished in writing workshop this year because I had the time to collaborate with my colleagues and discuss various strategies for differentiation." * "What recommendations do you have for the Professional Learning Committee as they plan for professional learning during the 2018-2019 school year?" - "I think it is important that we have more time to meet and lesson plan/curriculum plan with our departments and also have time to meet with cross curriculum on grade level." - "Special education teachers in upper and lower elementary work together to give advice, support and suggestions for writing challenges." - "I would be interested in having cycles interspersed with learning opportunities related to technology and using writing across content areas, as well as opportunities for vertical learning and planning." - "Shorter cycles with specific targets. Such as unit plans, having students research biographies and plan how they will present them. Also, after establishing a plan meeting every 6 weeks instead of weekly. There is not enough to discuss... maybe in between we can meet about math, social studies or science." - "I would like to have some of the sessions branch off to include other subject areas. (math, science, etc.)" - "I would like the opportunity to engage in social emotional curriculum development as part of our sessions." - "It would be helpful if we had time structured in to meet with other grades." - "Have time to look at student work across grades." - "A suggestion would be while we met horizontally, maybe it would benefit us as well to meet vertically with the grades as well." 2018-19 CEP 28  During the 2018-2019 school year, we will expand the scope of collaborative work within teacher teams that will allow for embedded professional development and action research, which will result in improvement in both pedagogy and student achievement. Analysis of practices aligned with school data indicates that while our teachers utilized benchmark assessments that were inclusive of monitoring all student academic growth throughout the year, there was not 100% alignment with regards to scoring all assessments across grade levels and departments within the school. It is necessary for all teachers to use standard tools for assessment in order to measure student growth within a grade and across grade levels. Since during the 2017-2018 school year we adopted the Teachers College Writing Curriculum and focused on writing within ELA (Pre-K - 8) and in interdisciplinary forms (6-8 non-ELA), during the 2018-2019 school year we will focus on specific strands and elements within the Teachers College Writing Pathways rubric to monitor student progress in a meaningful way across all grades and content areas. Additional common assessments will include the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, Go Math! benchmark assessments, and teacher-created document-based question responses in science and social studies. During the 2017-2018 school year, student proficiency on benchmark assessments were as follows: Reading - 85% Writing - 64% Math - 75% During the 2017-2018 school year, student proficiency on the NYS Examinations (Grades 3-8) were as follows: ELA - 67% (Decrease of less than 1% in comparison to school year 2017-2018) Math - 53% (Decrease of 9% in comparison to school year 2017-2018) Gains / Losses ES ELA MS ELA ES Math MS Math 26Q266 +0.4 +5.2 -2.93 -12.58 District Average +4.4 +3.3 +1.79 +0.23 The NYC School Survey score reflected in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicated positive results within the Framework Element of Collaborative Teachers with a score of 4.17. This score is significantly above the city average (+.50). Areas of concern based on teacher responses were as follows: * 63% of teachers say that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom. * 71% of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. The theory of action that our school has adopted is that if teachers are engaged in meaningful professional learning communities, then student achievement will improve. We believe that the quality of collaboration among colleagues and the depth and complexity of their conversations will result in instructional shifts, which will have a direct impact on our students' level of success. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in ELA and Math proficiency as measured by quantitative student progress on benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams and Administration will analyze data entered into benchmark assessment trackers housed in Google Drive. Particular attention will be paid to closing the achievement gap between general education students and students with disabilities. Instructionally Focused Teacher Teams will be established in the form of professional learning communities based on interest and school-wide instructional initiatives aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core and our Instructional Focus. Administration will meet with teacher teams on a regular basis to monitor team progress with strategy-based action plans driven by the review of professional resources, student assessment data, and action research. Teachers will utilize a school-wide protocol for analyzing student work to facilitate teacher team meetings during which student assessment data and action plans are used to monitor student progress, collaborate on appropriate strategies, and develop future action plans. Post-cycle surveys will be utilized to collect data regarding Teachers & Paraprofessionals experiences within the context of the Instructionally Focused Teacher Teams, and to make decisions regarding subsequent cycles. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers & Students Teachers Administration, Teachers & Paraprofessionals 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Teachers & Paraprofessionals Teachers & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration Teachers Administration, Teachers & Paraprofessionals 11/26/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Teachers & Paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Families will be engaged in parent workshops, Open School Weeks, and Curriculum Nights aligned with our work across core subject areas. ● Parents and guardians will be invited to participate in weekly engagement opportunities to discuss student academic progress, and work with the teachers, support staff and school administration to develop action plans to assist students with their growth and development. ● Parents and guardians will be given access to several learning management systems (i.e. Google Classroom, Engrade, PupilPath) to communicate with teachers and to stay informed about student learning expectations, 2018-19 CEP 31  assignments and progress. Sending home correspondences such as assessments, behavior logs, samples of Daily work, progress reports, and report cards, and placing phone calls will promote teacher-parent collaborations. Families will have the opportunity to ask questions, send messages, and communicate in real-time with school staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and C4E funds as available. Administration will collaborate with Queens North Field Support Center Instructional Leads to support the structure, implementation, and assessment of teacher teams, as well as alignment to both the CEP goal and Instructional Focus. Principal and Teacher collaboration around instructional initiatives has secured the Collaborative Action Research Project and the Teacher Leadership Program during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase in student achievement in core subject areas as measured by quantitative data measuring student progress on benchmark assessments, and continued progress made in the quality of teacher collaboration as measured by qualitative data reflected on teacher responses to school-created professional learning surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data submission forms completed by teachers and reviewed by the Administrative Team will be used to assess the accuracy and fidelity of standard tools for measuring student learning, while monitoring the extent to which progress towards grade-level proficiency is being made. Teacher team reflections and observations of the Administrative Team based on teacher team meeting support visits will provide qualitative feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The NYC School Survey score reflected in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicated positive results within the Framework Element of Collaborative Teachers with a score of 4.01. This score is above both the district average (+.25) and city average (+.48). Two measures stand out for the indicated percent positive: Inclusive Leadership (96%) and Instructional Leadership (97%). The other two measures are favorable, but not as positive: Program Coherence (86%) and Teacher Influence (82%). 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review feedback aligned with this element includes: * "Through consistent and effective communication, you are establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff for professionalism, instruction and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, coupled with the supports to achieve those expectations." * "Continue to design learning experiences for your staff that allow them to gain a deeper understanding of your expectations and begins resulting in a mutual accountability for those expectations." * "Continue to close the gap between your expectations and actual teacher practice through continued high-quality feedback loops coupled with a robust and responsive professional learning plan for 2018-19." * "Continue to support your staff in making the necessary adjustments to the curricula so that it emphasizes rigorous habits and opportunities for high-order skills for all learners. Through effective communication and strong practices for teacher evaluation, continue to develop teacher practice that is aligned to a shared set of beliefs for how children learn best, provides models of expectations (or "look for's") that teacher can replicate as they lift the level of teaching strategies such as questioning, planning for multiple entry points for varied levels of learners inclusive of ELL's and SWD's and result in classrooms where student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, participation and ownership." After reviewing HEDI ratings utilizing the Measures of Teacher Practice Detail Report in the Advance Web Application, the following average ratings were noted: * The average rating for DFfT component 1e was 3.03. * The average rating for DFfT component 3b was 2.94. * The average rating for DFfT component 3c was 2.93. * The average rating for DFfT component 3d was 2.99. 2018-19 CEP 33  The Administrative Team has identified DFfT component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction, as the highest-leverage area for this element that we believe will support teacher planning and practice, en route to improving student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the Administrative Team will execute a professional learning plan and provide meaningful feedback based on cycles of observations resulting in the improvement of teachers’ ability to effectively utilize assessment within their instructional practice as measured by a 5% increase in the average teacher rating across Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3d. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration, Teacher Instructional Leaders, and the Universal Literacy Coach will meet on a regular basis to discuss best practices around teaching and learning aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core and our Instructional focus, and efficient progress monitoring structures for tracking the effective implementation. Administration will engage in calibration and non-evaluative cycles in which teachers across all grade levels will be observed through the use of a protocol to evaluate the implementation of the curriculum and instructional expectations aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core and the Instructional Focus. At least twice, the District 26 Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach will accompany and support Administration during this process. Administration will facilitate the Professional Learning Team meetings and monitor and revise a strategic professional learning plan aligned with Danielson's Instructional Core and the Instructional Focus, as well as other areas of Teacher and Staff interest and need, such as topics aligned with the Supportive Environment element and the effective utilization of technology within the building. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Universal Literacy Coach & Teachers Administration & Teacher Instructional Leaders Administration & Teachers 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration Administration & Teachers 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration & Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Families will be engaged through parent workshops, Open School Weeks, and Curriculum Nights. ● Parents and guardians will be invited to participate in weekly engagement opportunities to discuss student academic and social-emotional progress and work with the teachers, support staff and school administration to develop action plans to assist students with their growth and development based on the work facilitated by the Administrative Team. 2018-19 CEP 35  ● Parents will be given access to learning management systems (i.e. Google Classroom, Engrade, and PupilPath) to communicate with teachers and to stay informed with student learning expectations, assignments and progress. Families will have the opportunity to ask questions, send messages, and communicate in real-time with school staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and C4E funds as available. On at least two occasions, the District 26 TDEC will join the Administrative Team in support of utilizing an appropriate lens to evaluate the effectiveness of teacher support within this element. We have been given access to receive support from a Universal Literacy Coach in alignment with the criteria put forth by the NYC DOE in alignment with the Universal Literacy for All initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Administrative Team will be in the midst of executing a professional learning plan and will have provided meaningful feedback based on two cycles of observations resulting in the improvement of teachers’ ability to effectively utilize assessment within their instructional practices as measured by a 2.5% increase in the average teacher rating across Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data reports will be used to determine observation completion and the extent to which there was an increase in the average teacher rating of Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3d. Surveys and observations of teacher utilization and implementation of curriculum and professional resources will be used to measure the success of each initiative addressed through professional learning opportunities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon analyzing a comprehensive set of qualitative and quantitative data, including parent workshop attendance sheets, PTA meeting attendance sheets, Chat & Chews with the Principal, and SLT meeting discussions and observations, it was evident that that there are still many parents who do not attend school events and activities. While the participation rate was maintained during the 2017-2018 school year, we are continuing to develop structures for additional parent engagement opportunities. Parents have expressed interest in learning opportunities to better understand the curriculum and ways they can help their children at home. The NYC School Survey score reflected in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicated positive results within the Framework Strong Family-Community Ties with a score of 4.15. This score is above both the district average (+.06) and city average (+.54). Both measures stand out for the indicated percent positive: Outreach to Parents (95%) and Parent Involvement in School (93%). A "Parent Engagement Survey" designed and administered by the SLT in May 2018 was completed by 66 families across grades Pre-K - 8. Notable responses were as follows: * About how many school events do you attend each year? ("Events" include Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Chat & Chew with the Principal, Extracurricular Activities, Field Trips, and Publishing Parties/Classroom Celebrations, etc.) - 1-3: 26% - 4-6: 24% - 7-9: 14% - 10+: 33% * What kind of school-wide events would encourage you to participate more in the school community? - "Family Night or anything during the evening hours that my child can be present" - "I attend what I can really because of my work schedule so if there are events on the weekends such a March or taking a stand for something the kids believe in, I will attend" - "Sports events" 2018-19 CEP 37  - "Events that shows the students abilities, such as science fairs, music and arts performances, talent shows, portfolio night to display students work throughout the year." - "More activities that parents & children can do together would be nice." - "More events for the middle school" - "School-wide annual spelling bee, school pep rally, movie night" - "I dont need a particular type of event to attend. If my child is involved I like to attend. Events that promote excellence in academics, healthy eating and fitness, anti bullying and promote respect of other culture and ethnicities." * Middle School Parents Only! What kinds of opportunities would encourage you to participate even more in your child’s middle school experience? - "Maybe asking the ms students what events they'd like and then trying one or two out Tutoring to help prep for regents and hs exams. Family game night events. Monthly middle school topic flyers/ new letters to help Ms parents know what is going on. More readily available information about hs through notices or school evening events. Fairs in each subject each month to show their work and let parents see what they've accomplished." - "More Performances, HS seminars" - "Any opportunity honestly. There is really no engaging with middle school." - "Something that would tie in parents and child or a presentation of something interesting the kids did: Science fair-type event or seeing a large class based project displayed - example robotics-teams from different classrooms compete to see who's robot can outperform the other; spelling bee again or a "mathletics" - "Classroom visits, visits when there are student presentations, etc." * Do you feel welcome within the PS/IS 266 school community? Please explain. - "Yes. I’m very happy with administration and office staff." - "Yes, the school is great and everyone is very supportive." - "Mostly" - "no, not really" - "Yes. Everyone tends to know each other. When you walk in, you are typically greeted by someone who either knows your name or knows your child/children. Displays out front feel inviting." - "Absolutely. Despite a few challenges this year, sending my daughter to this school is one of the best decisions I’ve ever made." - "I would love to be more involve and I don’t know how." -"Yes the community is welcoming. All the parents and teachers are friendly and try to engage me each time I attend an event" 2018-19 CEP 38  - "No, its not transparent.... There need to be more variety in extra curriculum activities for the children" Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school community will improve parent and guardian participation rates in school events by 5% as measured by school-designed attendance trackers. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration and teachers will engage parents in workshops that will allow families to learn more about instructional practices. This will be done in an effort to support parents with helping our students to meet their academic expectations. Administration, teachers and appropriate staff members will engage parents in workshops that will expose them to ways to offer social-emotional support to their child(ren). Topics of workshops will include Growth Mindset, Go Math!, Ready Gen., Teachers College Reading, Writing and Writing Pathways, Special Education, Respect for All, Google Classroom, Sanford Harmony, Overcoming Obstacles, RULER Anchor Tools for Emotional Intelligence, and Beautiful Me. Beautiful Me, Sanford Harmony, and Overcoming Obstacles will be presented to parents and teachers to enhance the understanding of social-emotional growth within the school community. Teachers, Parents/Guardians & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Teachers, Dean, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS/Youth Development Coordinator & SBST Bi-monthly Chat & Chew with the Principal gatherings will also focus on topics aligned with instruction, social-emotional learning, and other areas of parent interest. Information, handouts and resources shared at workshops and meetings will be posted on our school website in order to increase accessibility to resources and share with parents who are unable to attend each meeting. Parents 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration Teachers Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities that will increase their skills in using Learning Management systems that communicate with parents about Teachers 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration Teachers 2018-19 CEP 40 student academic progress, as well as social and emotional needs. Leadership within the stakeholders of the school community (Administration, Teachers, Staff & PTA) will collaborate to plan and host at least one event per grade band over the course of the school year. The purposes of the event could include showcasing students' work, exploring a particular academic area (i.e. literacy or STEM), or engaging in community-building activities. Parents/Guardians & Students 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Administration, Teachers, Staff & PTA Teachers and staff will utilize a building-wide sign-in sheet to support tracking of parent/guardian attendance at family engagement events. Parents/ Guardians 09/04/18 to 06/26/19 Teachers, SLT & Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be invited to regularly-scheduled workshop sessions during which they will engage with staff members who will present different aspects of our instructional and social-emotional learning programs (Sanford Harmony, Overcoming Obstacles, RULER Google Classroom, TC Reading & Writing, APEC, Growth Mindset, Online Resources, Learning Management systems, Next Generation Learning Standards in ELA and Math, etc.). During the 2018-2019, our school will also engage parents through workshop opportunities aligned with College Access 4 All. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, C4E, and PTA funds will be used to leverage resources and materials for parent engagement opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school community will improve parent and guardian participation rates in school events by 2.5% as measured by school-designed attendance trackers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress towards meeting the annual goal will be reviewed by analyzing SLT and school-created parent/guardian surveys and family engagement activity attendance trackers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) * Direct reading * Small group * During School * RTI Reading and/or phonics instruction Services (Tier 2) instruction * After School * Individual *Fountas & * Direct conferences * Saturday Pinnell writingprocess Benchmark instruction * Peertutoring Assessment Program System * Center/station teaching * A cut scale score of the * Guided New York reading State ELA Exam determined by the Board of Regents - "all students performing below the median 2018-19 CEP 42  Mathematics scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment" * Formative & Summative Classroom Assessments *RTIMath * Concept skills * Small group * During School Services (Tier practice instruction 2) * After School * Mental math * Individual * Go Math! conferences * Saturday Beginning of * Word-problem Year solving * Peertutoring Assessment Program * Go Math! Think *A cut scale Central score of the Resources New York State ELA Exam determined by the Board 2018-19 CEP 43  Science of Regents - "all students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment" * Formative & Summative Classroom Assessments * Formative & * Shared * Small group *During School Summative reading instruction Classroom Assessments * Interactive * Individual reading conferences strategies * Shared writing * Peertutoring * Interactive writing * Academic vocabulary practice 2018-19 CEP 44  Social Studies * Formative & * Shared * Small group *During School Summative reading instruction Classroom Assessments * Interactive * Individual reading conferences strategies * Shared writing * Peertutoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) * Interactive writing * Academic vocabulary practice * Second Steps * Teacher * Small group * During School referral, supportoffered including * Play Therapy by Guidance completed form Counselor, and attached * Speech Psychologist, anecdotal Social Worker, records * SETSS and Youth * Decision to offer services made by Pupil Development Counselor 2018-19 CEP 45  Personnel Team 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are currently 8 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47 Additional guidance and family support services as provided by school support staff such as our guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, youth development coordinator, and school leadership. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 50  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 51   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 266Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 266Q will support parents and families of all students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with all parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parents of all students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding funds, which can be allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and parent committees. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey; ● schedule parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 54  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) parent committees; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter and maintaining the school website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 266Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 55  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that available funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., parent committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 57  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name PS/IS 266Q Borough Queens School Number 266 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal 26Q266 Coach Paul Winter ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Pisani Teacher/Subject Area Racquel Chariah Related-Service Provider Lori Nestor Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Ayanna Greenidge Coach N/A School Counselor Marianna Freydlin, ENL Teacher Parent Samantha Sesenton, ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification N/A N/A N/A Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% 2018-19 CEP 59  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) SELECT ONEYesNo K 1 2 SELECT ONEYesNo 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis - - - - - 0 - - - - - 0 4 5 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 6 - - - - - - 0 7 - - - - - - 0 8 - - - - - - 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? - 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? - 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? - 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 60  - 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] - 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. - 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We utilize the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to identify students' independent and instructional reading levels in fiction and nonfiction reading, as well as to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The literacy assessment includes the following: Student growth within writing is monitored utilizing the Teachers College Writing Pathways Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions. Within mathematics, teachers utilize a variety of formative assessments provided by the Go Math! curriculum. These assessments provide insight as to specific skills that ELLs need to acquire, as well as supporting the development of their language and vocabulary skills. This data also helps to inform our instructional plans, as we assess using benchmark-driven cycles to track and monitor student growth and progress. After the assessments have been administered, teachers then engage in creating relevant action plans to address student needs. Supplemental assessments such as Reading A-Z, group projects and periodic project-based assessments are used to track the progress of ELLs and FELLs throughout the year. Furthermore, in line with the school's instructional focus, teachers provide ongoing, actionable feedback to students based on data gathered through formative assessment techniques such as asking and answering questions (based on depth of knowledge spectrum), think-pair-share, group work, exit slips, and classroom polls. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students progress is monitored daily, weekly, monthly and quarterly. Reading, Writing and Math Trackers are used to organize, track and analyze student data. Teacher teams collect and analyze data from both formative and summative assessments on a regular basis. Discussions are centered around student progress and performance. Progress reports as well as weekly parent engagement meetings happen on a consistent basis, ensuring that continuous communication exists between educators and parents regarding student achievement and progress. Special education teachers and out of classroom service providers work closely with classroom teachers to assess student need and provide appropriate services. b. TBE program. If applicable. NYC DOE baseline, Fall and Spring benchmark, and ELL benchmark assessments will be administered to all students. Summative assessments include NYS standardized tests in Mathematics, ELA and Science. Middle School students also have the option of taking the Regents in Mathematics and Science as well as the Spanish Language 2018-19 CEP 61  Proficiency exam. Other forms of summative assessments include the NYSESLAT exam for ELLs, quarterly periodic project based assessments for FELLs and the Teachers College Writing Pathways rubrics based monthly assignments. Additional summative data collection tools include end-of-year exams, Comprehensive Unit tests in Social Studies (through the Passport to Social Studies Curriculum) and teacher -created exams across all subject areas. c. DL program. If applicable. Several structures are in place to address interventions resulting from the summative data that is gathered. Parent teacher conferences, annual IEP and 504 meetings with our IEP teacher, PPT team and teachers, as well as teacher team meetings provide opportunities to discuss and address student needs. Small group instruction (Academic Boost Groups) is designed and implemented based on evolving student need. The boost group administrator creates schedules based on teacher recommendations and summative data assessments. Heterogeneous grouping across classes allows for a variety of interventions to be implemented in the classroom and flexible scheduling allows students to engage in each subject in the least restrictive environment, allowing all students to be successful. A variety of services such as ENL, Speech, Tutoring, Special Education, ICT, Counseling, SETSS and general education classes are available to meet student needs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Examination of students' educational and linguistic histories is vital to delivering the appropriate intervention for our ELLs. Data from formal (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and ELL Benchmark Assessments) and informal assessments are gathered to guide instruction for each ELL student. If evidence supports the need for students to move on to Tier 2 and Tier 3 levels, then they receive more targeted and intensive academic support through Academic Boost Groups, specially designed instruction, targeted small group work or flexible scheduling. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our MOSL Committee has identified the following measures of student learning as indicators for program decisions: NYS Science Test, Grade 4; NYS Earth Science Regents; NYS Math Regents; and the NYSESLAT exam. Furthermore, running records using the Fountas and Pinnell system are used to track yearly student progress and also inform programming decisions. In addition, data acquired from the NYSESLAT, as well as the ELA and Math state exams, is used to focus on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs. This data helps design effective instructional programs and/or interventions for those students. Factors analyzed include home language, grade level, years of ELL service, ELA/math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, holdover status, SIFE status, and disability classification. The ELL Data Analysis Tool creates custom categories, and the Early Warning Indicator feature automatically calculates the number of risk factors exhibited. The data acquired from the NYSESLAT, as well as the ELA and Math State Tests, is used to focus on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs. This data can help design effective instructional programs and/or interventions for those subgroups. Factors analyzed include home language, grade level, years of ELL service, ELA/math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, credit accumulation, holdover status, SIFE status, and disability classification. The ELL Data Analysis Tool can create custom categories. The Early Warning Indicator feature automatically calculates the number of risk factors exhibited and color-codes them accordingly. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Based on student need, the ENL teachers work with special education service providers to create a program in which students can be serviced for ENL and SWD mandates. Students are serviced across content areas (in accordance with their IEP mandates) to optimize learning conditions and to provide scaffolded and appropriate instruction. Flexible scheduling is available to ensure students are placed in the least restrictive environment in which they can be successful. For example, a 2018-19 CEP 62  student in a 12:1 special education class may be scheduled for math within an integrated co-teaching setting, and be accompanied to that class by his ENL provider. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students are grouped heterogeneously by grade. Per CR Part 154.2, Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week and have the opportunity to engage in project-based learning through small group work and individual tutoring. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction in ELA or another content area class. Transitioning students receive the minimum 90 minutes of integrated ENL during ELA instruction or other content-area instruction with a total of 180 minutes per week. Emerging students receive the minimum 90 minutes of standalone ENL and the minimum 180 minutes of integrated ENL during ELA, or other content areas, with a total of 360 minutes per week. Entering students receive a total of 360 minutes per week,with a minimum of 180 minutes of standalone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. For the majority of the time, ENL teachers push in to general education and special education classrooms in order to provide instruction on a daily basis. A co-teaching model exists between the classroom teachers and out of classroom ENL providers. Where appropriate, students also receive pull-out ENL instruction in a separate educational area (ENL room.) Students are grouped by grade. However, levels are mixed through heterogeneous grouping to best benefit the students. The ENL providers work with students in small groups and in whole class settings to deliver classroom content and linguistic support. All students receive services in accordance with the mandated time allotted by their current levels. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? N/A 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? N/A 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL teachers' schedules are reviewed and approved by administration. Subsequently, they are entered into STARS to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided. ENL, ELA and HLA instruction includes literature and content-based instruction that is aligned explicitly to the Next Generation Learning Standards. The TC Reading and Writing units of study are used to provide English Language Instruction. Most ENL instruction is integrated, where ENL and classroom teachers collaborate to deliver quality instruction to ELLs. ENL teachers push into ELA and other content areas. Former ELLs and ELL students who score on the Entering or Emerging level on the NYSESLAT receive the mandated minutes of stand-alone instruction. HLA support includes bilingual glossaries, dictionaries, and materials in students' home languages, such as dual-language books. School personnel who are able to provide support to students during the school day are utilized to provide clarification for ELLs (in their home languages) regarding school and homework assignments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the early childhood grades, decoding skills are developed using explicit and intensive instruction in phonological awareness and phonics. In the upper elementary and middle school grades, appropriately challenging texts are utilized to teach comprehension strategies. Academic language is vital to classroom discourse. It is essential for teachers to engage in 2018-19 CEP 63  structured academic talk. In addition, ENL and classroom teachers work with ELLs in small groups to target deficiencies. Literature-based materials, including library books, a listening center with audio-books and photo dictionaries are some of the materials used. There is an abundant supply of multicultural books. Instruction for ELLs is aligned to Next ion Standards as well as New Language Standards outlined in CR- Part 154. The ENL and classroom teachers use visuals and realia to support students' (at all levels) comprehension of content. Anchor charts, rubrics and graphic organizers enable students to understand information in manageable chunks and make concepts more comprehensible. Thinking Maps are also utilized. The ENL teacher focuses on vocabulary, language functions and structures, taught within the context of classroom lessons. She also scaffolds academic language to support students' participation in content areas. Technology is an integral part of instruction for all ELLs. Teachers use Promethean boards, laptops and iPads to engage students in content area instruction. The Teachers College Reading and Writing units of study expose students to a variety of linguistic strategies, and ensure comprehensive language acquisition through all four modalities of language: speaking, listening, reading and writing. The Go Math! curriculum has an online component that allows students to have the material read aloud - a feature that also makes the material more accessible to ELLs. Next ion Learning Standards in each subject area ensure that all classroom instruction is differentiated in accordance with student need and that materials are provided within whole group and small group instruction to aid in understanding. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Due to the fact that we do not have a bilingual program, ELL students are evaluated in English throughout the year. If ELL students are referred for an evaluation for special education services, they are evaluated in their home language. The Spanish LAB is administered to students who do not test out on the NYSITELL and whose home language is Spanish. Also, students are provided with home language glossaries. In the event that glossaries in a student's home language are not available, translation services are provided to all ELLs when they are tested in English. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Newcomers receive small-group instruction and are assigned a "buddy" for support. If there is a classmate whose home language is the same as the newcomer's, they are partnered with the new ELL student for further support. The ENL teacher differentiates instruction which corresponds to students' proficiency levels for Developing and Long-Term ENL students. If we have SIFE students, they will receive Title lll AIS, peer tutoring, and small group instruction. FELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week and engage in project-based learning groups, as well as small group and individual instruction. ELLs and FELLs receive time and a half and separate location testing accommodations on all assessments that allow. Bilingual glossaries that contain word-for-word translations only, are provided. Guidance on school system protocols is given to newcomers in 5th and 8th grade to aid them in transitioning to middle school and high school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For ELL-SWDs, the IEP is reviewed to determine the strategies and materials to be used. Materials used are selected according to the student's current level of performance and include Next Generation Learning Standards curriculum materials (Teachers College Reading and Writing Programs, Scholastic Code-X, Go Math!, Amplify Science Program & Passport to Social Studies), Oxford picture and bilingual dictionaries, guided reading, shared reading, interactive writing, read alouds, websites (including starfall.com, 4esl.org, and additional websites) and software materials. Students are serviced by certified out of classroom teachers in conjunction with their classroom program. All mandated service providers push in to classrooms or pull students out into small groups. These students also have additional support through RtI and the use of the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention kits. The IEP teacher facilitates all IEP amendments and tracks services through an IEP master list. The master list is updated on a continual basis. If a bilingual program is mandated, an alternate placement bilingual paraprofessional is put in place. 2018-19 CEP 64  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Based on student need, the ENL teachers work with special education service providers to create a program through which students can be serviced for ENL and SWD mandates. Students are serviced across content areas (in accordance with their IEP mandates) to optimize learning conditions and to provide scaffolded and appropriate instruction. Flexible scheduling is available to ensure students are placed in the least restrictive environment in which they can be successful. For example, a student in a 12:1 special education class may be scheduled for math in an integrated co-teaching setting, and be accompanied to that class by his ENL provider 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All instruction is delivered in English. Instruction is aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards in all content areas, as well as the NYS Bilingual Progressions outlined in CR-Part 154. Teachers scaffold academic language to support each ELLs' participation in the content areas. Homework and classroom assessments are differentiated. For ELA, Math, and all other content areas, RtI and small-group instruction are delivered in students' classrooms. All ELL students are invited to After School AIS and Saturday Academy programs. Summer in the City Programs are also available for ELL students and serve to provide a year-round education. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Due to the new CR-Part 154.2 regulation, students will be receiving additional integration services so that they can be serviced within the classroom setting. This will allow for the student to be present for more classroom instruction and receive the support of the mandated ENL services to be successful in the classroom setting. FELLs or students who performed at a Commanding level will have the opportunity to participate in alternative forms of service provided by the ENL service providers. These include small group learning, individualized targeted learning, and project-based learning. In the event that progress through these avenues is deemed insufficient (by January 2019), student will immediately revert back to receiving 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL. Furthermore, the departmentalization of our 5th grade will enable students to be more autonomous learners and responsible citizens. ELLs and former ELLs will have access to a larger variety of educators and will have more opportunities to engage in a variety of learning experiences. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). N/A 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ELLs in the building are afforded equal access to all school programs. During school hours, they attend assemblies, PE, and talent (Art, Computer, or Music). All students are invited to try out for after school arts activities, including vocal music and drama. All students are also invited to participate in other after school programs, such as Debate, Chess, Rising NYC Road Runner, Track, and Flag Football. ELL students are invited to participate via fliers and letters that are sent home. Written correspondences are sent home in the preferred home language if available. The majority of our ENL students attend our after school program. Special guidance is offered to ELLs, FELLs and Newcomer students through orientation, student-parent meetings and small-group conferences that center around school protocols, navigating a new environment, and school culture. These meetings/conferences are facilitated by the ENL service provider, parent coordinator and school guidance counselor. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 65  The Teachers College Reading and Writing units of study, Scholastic Code-X, Go Math!, Amplify Science and Passport to Social Studies are used in the content areas. All curricula are aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards, and all lessons are aligned with the Bilingual Progressions outlined in CR- Part 154. The ENL teachers also use these in standalone ENL instruction to support students' understanding of content-area material. Through The use of ENL strategies such as pre-teaching vocabulary and scaffolding content, ENL teachers make the general curriculum accessible to ELLs and FELLs. Oxford picture and bilingual dictionaries, websites (including starfall.com, 4esl.org, and additional websites) and software materials are incorporated into instruction. Literature-based materials, including library books, a listening center with audio-books, and photo dictionaries are additional materials used. There is an abundant supply of multicultural books in the ENL classroom. There is also a supply of dual-language books, a variety of leveled texts and Longman publishing textbooks that align with classroom used texts but are geared toward English Language Learners. Promethean Boards, laptop carts and I-Pads are available for student use in all classrooms. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the initial stages of the writing process, newcomers are encouraged to write assignments in their home languages and then have their work translated into English. Bilingual picture dictionaries and dual language books are available in the classroom. In addition, students are introduced to websites which have bilingual information, pictures and educational games. Babelfish applications are downloaded onto iPads for student use, and Languagenaut is made available to students who require home language support across all subject areas. Furthermore, websites such as Brainpop ESL, Brainpop Espanol and Starfall.com are available to provide support to Spanish speaking students at K-2 grade levels. Glossaries across all subject areas are available in 32 languages and are provided to all ENL students and former ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All academic supports are grade and age appropriate and/or appropriate to student's current level of performance. For ELLs-SWD, their ages and cognitive needs are, of course, taken into consideration. Scaffolds for all ELLs are used to consistently grow the students' level of sophistication and grade-appropriate skill sets. Classroom teachers track student progress across all content areas and have continuous opportunities to collaborate with ENL and Special Education providers to ensure that all required services and accommodations for student learning are current, and appropriate. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Ou school shares a location with a district 75 middle school. Our students participate in a diversity learning buddy program and our schools share flexible scheduling protocols in order to meet the needs of all of our students. The Samuel Field Y runs the 2018-19 CEP 66  after school program in our building, and gives students access to programs such as dance, art, leadership skill building, civics, physical education, jewelry-making, homework help and cooking. ELLs are a targeted subgroup for being exposed to programs that amplify their language acquisition and participate in trips to the local library, information sessions about programs around the city (such as the Refugee Academy Summer Program and the local Beacon Program.) The Guidance Counselor and ENL provider meet regularly to ensure the logistics of all ENL student schedules have been worked out and that they are accurately programmed for and are receiving appropriate services (both academic and social-emotional.) 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Newly enrolled ELL students are supported with appropriate assessments, instruction and progress monitoring to support their academic growth and development. In an effort to support their social and emotional growth, they are engaged in peer mentorships and provided with a variety of school activities. Families of newly enrolled ELL students are supported through parent-teacher meetings and workshops. Weekly parent engagement sessions allow ENL Teachers and newcomer parents to be apprised of school protocols, initiatives and upcoming events. The ENL parent orientation introduces parents of ELLs to a variety of resources and services available to them and their children. The School Counselor, Parent Coordinator and ENL Provider facilitate these orientations and conversations. Throughout the year, the ENL provider is available to welcome all new students to the building, answer questions and provide access to resources. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ELL students are offered Spanish in grades 1-4 & 6-8 as a language elective. 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, N/A , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances 2018-19 CEP 69  School Name: Staff development takes place on an ongoing basis. General and Special Education staff, as well as our ENL providers, receive training throughout the academic year. Professional development takes place at the school level, with the support of the Queens North Borough Field Support Center, and Central Offices. The Queens North Field Support Center conducts D26 ELL Liason Meetings during which strategies to strengthen the literacy skills of ELLs within the classroom are addressed. Such strategies include, but are not limited to, working with engaging texts, engaging ELLs in rich content-based discussion, developing writing to build language, and building the depth of academic vocabulary knowledge. For in-house training, the focus is on methodologies that can be implemented on a daily basis in the General Education classroom with an emphasis on teaching through multiple modalities, teaching to students' learning styles, as well as student interests. Specific ENL workshops and professional development sessions are offered through the office of English Language Learners and include topics such as ELL identification, Working with SIFE students and NYSESLAT administration. Professional Development is also aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. Staff development days includes one days before students return to school, Chacellor's Conference Days (November & June). and ongoing Professional Development on Monday afternoons (Teacher Team meetings and targeted professional learning opportunities). Tuesday afternoon grade meetings (following parent engagement) focus on Data Driven Instruction and specific teacher committees that align to our professional focus. School DBN: We are a Pre-K - 8 school. As such, the transition from elementary to middle school runs smoothly. Teachers collaborate and A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers as prescribed by CR Part 80, and 50% of the required professional development hours for our ENL teacher, will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Our ENL providers attend district and city-wide professional development sessions and turnkey the information to schoo-based pedagogical colleagues. Specific workshops on ENL practices and work with ELLs and FELLs are available throughout the year and are led by our ENL coordinator. Mentoring hours and resources are also available through our ENL department. Attendance and agendas for all professional development are kept on file with the school Principal. Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. ensure proper placement knowledge of students for each student. and support share to Title Signature Principal Name (PRINT) The 40 minutes of time NYC schools set aside each week for families is used to include parents in their child’s education. Goals, students' progress and assessment results are discussed in either individual face-to-face meetings, or telephone conversations with parents of ELLs. In-person or over-the-phone interpretation services are utilized, if necessary. Furthermore, each year orientations are held to welcome parents to the school and educate them about the upcoming year and their choices of ENL programs. Parents are invited into the school on several occasions throughout the year outside of the standard parent-teacher conferences. These events include "Meet the Teacher"/"Curriculum" night, and grade-specific orientations. Annual IEP meetings are scheduled to allow parents of students Date (mm/dd/yy) PTA meetings are held once a month. The parents and families of our ELL students have several opportunities to become familiar with all programs that the New York City Department of Education offers. There is a parent orientation at the beginning of the school year for parents/guardians of new ELLs, and parent workshops are scheduled during the year to assist parents in participating in their child’s education. Translated materials are distributed to students and parents in their native languages. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend meetings scheduled to inform parents of school events and policies so that they may be involved in the decision-making process. Interpreters are available for all teacher-parent 2018-19 CEP 70  with IEPs to contribute their thoughts and observations to their child's education plan. meetings. Over-the-phone interpretation is provided by Language Line, and written translations are provided by the DOE Office of Translation and Interpretation Unit. Interpreters for face-to-face meetings are provided by The Big Word Language Communication Company and by parent volunteers and school personnel, when appropriate and available. Parents are informed of the availability of interpretation and translation services and given a request form to complete if these services are needed. Activities that consider the students' cultural and language background--including Multicultural Day--are planned to celebrate all students in the school. Children are served lunch brought in by school staff and parent volunteers with food from various countries. Parents of ELLs are invited to come on that day and share aspects of their cultural background with our students. Many of our parents also come into our classrooms for Open-School Week, and attend "Chat & Chew with the Principal" once a month. Occasionally, we have family movie night. Our students are cast in productions twice a year (grade-band specific), which families, and friends of families, attend. Our school choir and band also perform for families and other students, as well as school staff. 2018-19 CEP 71  Assistant Principal PS/IS 266 Parent Coordinator Ayanna Greenidge ENL/Bilingual Teacher Paul Winter Lori Nestor Parent Teacher/Subject Area Marianna Freydlin Teacher/Subject Area Racquel Chariah Samantha Sesenton Coach Coach N/A N/A N/A 10/16/17 N/A N/A School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Ayanna D. Greenidge 26Q266 06/27/18 10/16/17 10/16/17 06/26/18 10/16/17 06/26/18 N/A N/A Nicholas Pisani N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q266 School Name: PS/IS 266 Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lori Marianna Nestor Freydlin Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize a number of sources to determine the preferred language of our parents/guardians: Home Language Identification Survey; RAPL and UPPG reports in ATS; Emergency Contact cards; forms filled out at registration, including the Language Needs Survey, and another form (unnamed) that asks the preferred language for oral and written communication. This form has questions in English and nine other languages: Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Mandarin, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. These help us to identify parents' interpretation and translation needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 73  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Chinese Hindi Korean Mandarin Maltese Malayalam Pilipino Punjabi Spanish Tamil Urdu 4 11 2 8 0 1 1 0 6 10 1 7 0.53 1.47 0.27 1.07 0 0.14 0.14 0 0.8 1.34 0.13 0.94 4 12 2 9 2 1 1 1 6 14 1 8 0.53 1.6 0.27 1.2 0.27 0.14 0.14 0.13 0.8 1.87 0.14 1.07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to Parent handbooks October 2, 2017 parents. Submit to Translation and Interpretation Unit Parent-Teacher Conference Notice September and November, 2017, and March and May, 2018 Translation and Interpretation Unit; bilingual staff member to call. Notifications for Parent Orientations Throughout the school year Translation and Interpretation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 74  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Orientation September, 2018 Parent-Teacher Conferences November, 2018, and March, 2019 Parent Engagement Tuesdays at 2:20 interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members; in-person interpreter(s) from Big Word; over-the-phone interpretation from Language Line Bilingual staff members; in-person interpreter(s) from Big Word; over-the-phone interpretation from Language Line Bilingual staff members or over-the-phone interpretation from Language Line 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Since we have such a small number of parents who require oral interpretation, staff member can use Language Line to notify them. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will make copies of the Chancellor's Regulation and distribute it to the entire staff and will be discussed during one of the PDs. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have the multilingual language poster by the entrance, directing parents to our Parent Coordinator, as noted at the bottom. Also, copies of the Parent's Guide to Language Access are available on a table located near the entrance of the school. Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities is accessible online can can be printed out and disseminated. The Achieve NYC Guide is also distributed to parents. Occasionally, there are citywide, borough-wide and district-wide events/workshops for parents where interpreters are present. At a parent's request, our Parent Coordinator will be available to assess the needs of the LEP parent and provide assistance wherever necessary. 2018-19 CEP 75  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be asked to complete the NYC School Survey in their preferred language yearly, in addition to periodic school- or PTA- created parent surveys. We will be working with our School Leadership Team, administration and staff to improve language services. There are also meetings with our Principal to discuss allocation of funds available to provide language assistance services. 2018-19 CEP 76 
