2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q281 School Name: EAST-WEST SCHOOL OF INTERNATIONAL STUDIES Principal: ANTHONY CROMER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information East-West School of International Studies 342500011281 6-12 46-21 Colden Street, Flushing, NY 11355 School Number (DBN): 25Q281 718-353-0009 Phone Number: 718-353-3772 Fax: Anthony Cromer acromer@ewsis.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Anthony Cromer Gloria Nicodemi Sharlene Tillett Anthony Cromer SharleneTillett Mi Jung You, Korean American Family Service Center CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 RCintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5124 Phone Number: 718 923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St 6 FL aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5941 Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Cromer Gloria Nicodemi Sharlene Tillett Mi Jung You PunnieCheng Brittany Culicerto LaToyaPatterson-Balzora *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lauren Leonardson Angela Cobb Karen Curzio Judy Luong Cora Wong Dayniece Young Member/UFT Member/PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/PTA Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The East-West School of International Studies strives to foster a positive learning environment in diverse and inclusive classrooms. The school is driven by its four pillars: Honor, Excellence, Curiosity, and Celebration. 2018-19 CEP 9  East-West embraces a well-rounded education that includes rigorous academics, the arts, and languages, inclusive of all cultures with a focus on East Asian studies. Students are expected to graduate with an Advanced Regents Diploma and to meet College Readiness Performance Standards on the New York State Regents Exams. East-West strongly believes in providing authentic learning experiences for students. Through the collaboration of staff members, parents, and local community leaders, students receive unique opportunities to explore New York City and abroad. East-West celebrates the diversity and cultural backgrounds of all students. Through clubs and after school activities, students flourish in a social setting that supports their differences and interests. East-West’s goal is to develop students who are compassionate and curious, have a strong sense of self, and the foundation for success in college and beyond. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At the East-West School of International Studies, Asian language and arts, humanities, and technology provide a unifying theme to students' high school careers to motivate them through a grade 6-12 continuum and to graduate high school college and career ready. Unique Characteristics include:  Daily morning "Muster" meeting to promote student voice and celebrate student accomplishments  Active chapter of National Honor Society  Advisory curriculum to improve student well-being  216-hour community service requirement  ASD NEST Program to support students with Autism Spectrum Disorder International exchange programs with sister schools in China and Japan   Three-year high school language sequence in Chinese, Japanese, or Korean  College Now courses available through Queens College and LaGuardia Community College  6-12 college preparatory curriculum   Partnership with College Bound Initiative to maximize college acceptance rate and scholarship opportunities  Partnership with Story 2 to guide students in essay writing skills and preparing college admissions essays  Partnership with A-List SAT preparatory program for Juniors and Seniors  Monthly "First Friday" Open School Day and "Tea and Talk with Principal"  College trips for all students in grades 6-12  Service Learning Program created to engage students in leadership and community improvement Senior Institute course to support students through college admissions process 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special student populations at East-West include 13% of students who are mandated for English as a New Language instruction and services. Our Special Education population is 13%, including 27 ASD NEST in grades 6-11. ASD NEST students need separate classrooms, 2 speech teachers, a physical therapist, a NEST Coach, occupational therapy, Social Developmental Intervention (SDI) sessions, group and individual counseling, and ICT in all subjects. 2018-19 CEP 10  Special Education students need SETTS, ICT in all core subjects, speech, occupational therapy, group and individual counseling, and/or self-contained classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made continued measurable progress in improving Family and Community Ties through establishment of "First Friday" open school days, expanded opportunities for parents through our PTA, and the introduction of many new school-based events that include parents, like additional awards presentations and our first annual Science Fair we had this year. We have noticed that these efforts have increased the amount of parents that have come out to the school and increased our PTA attendance by 10% when comparing SY17-18 to SY 16-17. We take pride in our consistent outreach and translation efforts we provide to meet the needs of Chinese-speaking families. Our key areas of focus for SY 17-18 were increasing rigor for improved student outcomes, and improving access to higher-level coursework. During this time our school-wide focus on assessment, new classroom observation protocols, and timely feedback resulted in staff ratings for component 3D in the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching shifting from 38% "Developing" to 4% Developing, and "Highly Effective" ratings for the same component rose from 27% to 57% over the course of the school year. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to focus on increasing college readiness metrics, improving classroom rigor, and providing more students improved access to higher-level coursework. This will happen through our higher level Mathematics courses as well as through the expansion of our Advanced Placement Course offerings such as Advanced Placement U.S. History. This targeted programming is in alignment with our SY18-19 Superintendent District Goals, which will ensure our students are more college ready. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q281 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 649 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 4 7 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 10 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 77.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 18.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.53 6% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 77.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 93% 89% 93.0% 31.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 103 83 95.0% 9.2% 13.3% 8.3% 67.3% 0.9% 4 17% 6 78.3% 90% 97% 91% 97.0% 44% N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A NO N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our school strengths include the fact that we have a staff that nurtures a culture of collaboration where we plan together, examine student work, and make curricular adjustments. We commit to providing rigorous instruction through organized professional development, improved observation protocols and more detailed feedback. Our graduation rate increased from 93% to 94% when comparing June 2017 to June 2018. Our efforts have seen substantial gains in New York State Regents Exam performance; for example, passing rates in our Algebra 2 course this year have increased from about 66% to over 90% (comparing SY 16-17 to SY 17-18). Our Earth Science Regents Exam pass rates have improved from 90% to over 95% for the same time period, well exceeding the average for New York City. Our U.S. History Regents Exam pass rate is 98%, consistently higher than more than 90% of schools in the borough of Queens. Our Advanced Placement Exam data leads most of New York City in a few content areas; for example, in 2017, we averaged a 4.5 score on the AP Calculus exam, and 3.6 in AP Computer Science Principles. As we approach the 2018-2019 school year, in alignment with the superintendent's goals to increase College Readiness Metrics by 5% and student placement in higher level Math courses by 10% , we want to build on our aforementioned success by improving classroom rigor, increasing college readiness, and ensuring our students have more access to higher level coursework. 2) Our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide surveys indicate that 59% of students responded that they do not feel challenged by their coursework. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will increase academic support, classroom rigor and resources for all students to improve academic achievement in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies as evidenced by a 2% increase in our College Readiness Index when comparing performance for school years 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 13  2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will expand our course offerings to include Advanced Placement U.S. History. We will send our teachers for professional development during summer 2018 and order textbooks. Our Guidance Counselor will look at transcripts, and students will submit AP course request sheets, as we provide more access to rigorous coursework for our youngsters. We will offer an Advanced Placement prep course in Art History for the 2018-2019 school year. Students will take this support class and get exposed to AP coursework, strengthening their skills, and preparing them for an Art History Advanced Placement course September 2019. We will create a "College Readiness Report" for the fall and spring term to better communicate how we are ensuring our students are more college ready to all of our school community. We will continue the work of our College Readiness Team examining school data and making recommendations that ensure progress towards our goal of improving our school's college readiness metrics. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 11 and 12th graders September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, U.S. History teacher 10th and 11th graders September 2018-June 2019 Parents, Staff, and entire school community. September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors Math Teacher, Social Studies Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Math Coach, ELA Coach, Department Chairs September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Math Coach, ELA Coach, Department Chairs We will define classroom rigor and equity in teaching practice, as a school community, fine tuning teacher practice through multiple professional development sessions. We will administer school-wide reading diagnostics to re-establish baseline data for some students and be able to track growth throughout the year. Parents, Staff, and entire school community. 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator and support staff will host workshops for parents to explain new academic expectations and supports during the summer and fall. A.P. Course fairs will inform our parents. In addition, newsletters and teacher report cards will show student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will leverage to meet this goal will consist of human and instructional resources. We will provide Academic Intervention Services through teacher assigned C6 periods and tutoring before and after-school. We will use a new reading diagnostic program entitled "Scantron Performance Series" to re-establish baseline data and track progress of our students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our Progress Monitoring Committee, administration team, School Leadership Team, and School Cabinet/Dept. Chair Team members will ensure there is more rigor in our classrooms, as evidenced by 2% increase in our college readiness metrics. By this point in the school year we will have defined equity and rigor in the classrooms and also have teacher observations which reflect more rigor. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance data, classroom scholarship, A.P. exam data, teacher observations, and January Regents exams, student transcript Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to our 2018 NYC School Survey, 91% of our students reported feeling safe in their classes and 86% of students feel safe in hallways, bathrooms, locker room, and cafeteria. 2. Our 2018 NYC School Survey results also tell us that 59% of our students say that they feel challenged in their classes. This number is higher than in prior surveys, but we would still like to improve this number. Our action plan includes increasing the enrollment and improving the access for all student subgroups programmed in Advanced Placement classes. Improving how we differentiate lessons for our students is how we will ensure more students feel challenged as well. One of our lowest performing subgroups is our Special Education population. We would like to improve their performance in classroom scholarship and NY State Regents Exam performance. One of the ways we will make that happen is through improved differentiation by all teachers in all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 Our Advanced Placement classes and higher level math course student enrollment data will be more inclusive of previously underrepresented sub-groups, as evidenced by a 5% increase in African-American, Hispanic, and Students with Disabilities, when comparing school year 2017-2018 to school year 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 5% more African-American, Hispanic, and Students with Disabilities will be programmed for AP courses, and the AP Art History prep course. Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 More students will report feeling challenged in their classes on surveys. More higher-level course offerings will be offered. More teachers will be supported to differentiate in their classrooms. All students grades 6-12, teachers January 2018-June 2019 Teachers will be assigned time to review IEPs at various times, including our Monday PD sessions, in order to differentiate better and improve classroom scholarship for students with IEP's. All teachers, September 2018-June 2019 Once a month we will change our mandated Tuesday "Parent Contact Time" for teachers after-school to hold a mandatory NEST Team meeting to discuss supports we are targeting towards our NEST kids to ensure we address all the needs on their IEP's. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, Assistant Principals, HS Guidance Counselor, Department Chair Principal, Assistant Principals, HS Guidance Counselor, Department Chairs, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Chairs, PD Committee, Teachers, Teacher Leaders, Nest Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator will conduct parent workshops to support parents of students in higher-level courses and students who have failed to meet College Readiness standards in English. Senior Institute teachers of 12th grade students will communicate new school-wide college readiness expectations through telephone and Skedula updates throughout the fall and at Parent-Teacher Conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  We will leverage school funds such as Tax Levy and Title 1 funding as well as human resources, and instructional resources. This will include teachers, C6 common planning periods, academic intervention service periods, and per session for after-school tutoring. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 5% more African-American, Hispanic, and students with disabilities will be enrolled in higher-level AP courses courses when comparing the 2017-2018 school year to the 2018-2019 school year. The Principal will review course programming by student sub-group with the School Progress Monitoring committee and School Cabinet Team to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data specialist created an enrollment history report with year-on-year percentages of sub-group enrollment. In addition, classroom enrollment data, and Stars data will be referenced. Regents exam performance reports, and student transcripts will be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on the 2017 School Survey, 91% of teachers responded positively to questions about Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction. 2. Co-teaching pairs reported on an in-house survey that they do not have sufficient time to common plan, and interdisciplinary planning is limited. The priority need to be addressed is the expansion of dedicated Common Planning band in which at least 80% of teachers are available to common plan with one another in co-teaching pairs, departmental teams, and grade-level interdisciplinary groups. An SBO was passed to allow teachers to preserve Common Planning periods and AIS periods. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our teachers will be programmed for common planning, to collaborate together, and analyze Common Core Learning Standard performance tasks and student work. This will be evidenced by a 2% increase in classroom scholarship for the 2018-2019 school year and at least 5 professional development sessions focused on curriculum revision. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of Common Planning band for 80% of teachers to be free during the same period to co-plan in various configurations Teachers in grades 6-12 Conduct teacher data review sessions to review scholarship, Advance, student performance, and standardized exam data. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Professional Development to support interdisciplinary co-planning: Teachers will be trained to use a protocol for looking at student work and collaborating to revise curriculum and document curriculum revisions. All content area teachers September 2018- June 2019 Expansion of Curriculum Planning and Professional Development Team to facilitate curriculum revision work and professional learning during common planning and after school PD sessions. Curriculum Planning Teacher Teams will then present highlights of their work to other teachers. All teachers October 2018-May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, School Programmer, Department Chairs, Literacy Coach, Math Coach Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Department Chairs Principal, Assistant Principals, PD Committee, Literacy Coach, Department Chairs Principal, Assistant Principals, Curriculum Planning Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal, Assistant Principals, and Teacher Leaders will make presentations to parents at monthly PTA meetings to explain new initiatives such as common planning time and teacher teams work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  We will leverage human resources such as teachers. Teacher per session will be used for our Curriculum Planning Team and Department Chairs. Title I funds will be used for consultants for Literacy and Math. Program adjustments will be implemented (alignment of 80% of teacher C6 periods to a dedicated Common Planning band). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our Progress Monitoring Committee, School Cabinet/Department Chair Team, will review that at least 80% of teachers who are programmed for common planning are in pairs or teams, documenting teacher team meetings, and filling out Teacher Common Planning time feedback forms, as evidenced by a 2% increase in classroom scholarship. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring committee will monitor the percentage of teachers planning together (80%), meeting agendas, sign-in sheets, and/or minutes, and Teacher Common Planning Time Feedback forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths include 98% positive response to questions on 2017 School Survey about Inclusive Leadership and 91% positive response to questions on School Survey about Teacher Influence. 2. Priority Need: Only 48% of teachers say their professional development experiences this year have included enough time time to think about, evaluate, and try new ideas. Only 75% of the staff feel they have had enough time to work collaboratively with a colleague. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher team meetings and school professional development sessions will be planned and facilitated by teacher leaders, in coordination with the Principal, to build the leadership capacity of our teachers as evidenced by implementation of 3 new teacher teams, 3 Teacher model classrooms and a 5 % increase in school-wide component 3D Advance teacher ratings, when comparing school year 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-weekly Department Chair Meetings led by Teachers who are the Department chairperson and Team meetings led by groups such as our Curriculum Revision Team. The Principal will also lead instructional teams by content area, and consultants will lead teams across all content areas. Department Chairs, Teachers, the Principal September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Chairs, Consultants. Data Specialist will work with Department Chairs and Teacher Leaders to track scholarship data and standardized test results. Department Chairs Teacher Leaders will be used to set up and showcase model classrooms to guide instruction and enhance professional development for all staff. Several professional development sessions will focus on improving ratings for assessment and component 3D. We will implement a Progress Monitoring Committee to evaluate progress in meeting school goals. We will institute common planning time feedbcak forms and a teacher team protocol for teams at our school Teachers Progress Monitoring Committee, Assistant Principals, Principal September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Specialist, Department Chairs Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Chairs, Teacher Leaders. October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Chairs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal and Assistant Principals will introduce department goals and implementation of Teacher model classrooms at PTA meetings to parents and publicly recognize outstanding student outcomes by subject. We will also hold meetings with parents at PTA gatherings to implement parent focus groups to have greater impact on school-wide decisions such as school-wide tutoring needs etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human and Instructional resources will be leveraged. We will budget per session for Department Chair Meetings, FSF monies for Teacher Leader salary increases, as well as C6 Common Planning Band to support Teacher Leaders working with staff for collaboration, and per session for our Data Specialist. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Teacher team meetings and school professional development sessions will be planned and facilitated by teacher leaders, building leadership capacity as evidenced by a 5% increase in school-wide component 3D Advance teacher ratings, and the implementation of 3 new teacher teams and 3 model classrooom. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Galaxy will reflect salary increases given to our Teacher Leaders, and per session used to pay teachers who lead our departments. Department goals, meetings, agendas will be used to reflect the work of all of our department chairs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School's strength is frequent opportunities for parents to visit the school (First Fridays) and meet informally with the principal (Tea and Talk) and monthly Parent Coordinator newsletter. Priority need is improving the low parent and teacher attendance at PTA meetings. At most PTA meetings the past year, less than 10% of school community attended. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide incentives to parents and modify PTA meeting times, to improve parental involvement as evidenced by a 5% increase of parents who attend PTA meetings and other school-wide events when comparing school year 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Regular ceremonies for Principal's Awards to honor students and we will hire a Parent Coordinator. Parents Guest speakers at PTA Meetings. Parents Themed days to honor individuals (e.g. Father's Day). Parents, Teachers Teacher awards to recognize high student outcomes. Teachers Flyers and phone blasts to advertise special awards and guest speakers. Parents September 2018-June 2019, Bi-monthly September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019, Bi-monthly November 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator Principal, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors. Principal, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors. Principal, Assistant Principals, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors. Parent Coordinator, Community Associates, Guidance Counselors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Connect NYC, NYC Parks Department, Hodori 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources (Parent Coordinator, Service Learning Coordinator, Community Coordinator, Community Associate, Guest Speakers) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, PTA meeting logs and school-wide event logs will reflect at least a 5% increase in parent attendance when compared school years 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA Meeting attendance logs, school event attendance log, and tracking spreadsheet. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) IEP status, Lowest third status, Regents exam grade, course grade, ENL level, students meeting criteria inNYSED'smemorandum of having less than a median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English Language Arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. IEP status, Lowest third status, Regents exam grade, course grade, ENL level, students meeting criteria inNYSED'smemorandum of having less than a median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. IEP status, Lowest third status, Regents exam grade, course grade, ENL level, students meeting criteria inNYSED'smemorandum of having less than a Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Castle Learning, Wilson Reading Intervention,Class Tutoring, A-List Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group; one-to-one; tutoring, etc., reading teacher When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day; after the school day CMP Math, Khan Academy, DeltaMath, Class tutoring, A-List Small group; one-to-one; tutoring, etc. During the school day; after the school day Castle Learning, class tutoring Small group; one-to-one; tutoring, etc. During the school day; after the school day 2018-19 CEP 29 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English Language Arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. IEP status, Lowest third status, Regents exam grade, course grade, ENL level, students meeting criteria inNYSED'smemorandum of having less than a median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English Language Arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. Attendance, At-risk status, Lowest third status, IEP mandatesIEP status, Regents exam grade, course grade, ENL level, students meeting criteria inNYSED'smemorandum of having less than a median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. Castle Learning, class tutoring, essay revision Small group; one-to-one; tutoring, etc. During the school day; after the school day Counseling; college counseling; peer mediation, peer tutoring 3x/week Group; one-to-one, reading teacher During the school day, after school 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 16 students We provide uniforms and school supplies, including backpacks. At-risk tutoring and school counselors will provide counseling. Additional requests met upon knowledge of need. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Hiring fairs; targeted outreach through New Visions; NYU and Queens College outreach. Full-day screened interview process for new teacher candidates. Potential staff members go through a multi-step process which includes interviews, writing samples and multiple demo lessons. ASD NEST teachers attend monthly outside professional development at New York University. In-house Math Coach, Literacy Coach, NEST Coach. We support teachers by paying for graduate courses and continuing education courses. We also reimburse teachers for new courses we will implement for the 2018-2019 school year such as our Robotics and Advanced Placement U.S. History course. We have supported teacher applications for Math for America and support teacher participation in academic conferences such as NCTE and ACTFL. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1) Literacy Coach will develop schedules to guide Common Planning time and work with all departments to implement literacy strategies. 2) In-house mentors work with first-year teachers and teacher residents. 3) Math coach will work with teachers to make evidence-based improvements in instruction aligned with Common Core Math standards and Advance Danielson rubric. 2018-19 CEP 33  4) Nest coach works with teachers and students to implement Nest strategies in classrooms. 5) Special Education Co-chairs will work with teachers and students to implement differentiation strategies. 6) Teacher Leaders and Department chairs will work with teachers to ensure students meet Common Core Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Department Chairs will collaborate with the principal to standardize parts of the school's grading policy. Department Chairs also provide input in the decision making process about assessments and assessment policy. MOSL Committee and the Professional Development Comittee process ensures that teacher voice is represented in the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and professional development around assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 34  purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d,5e 5a, 5b, 5c 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $331,188 $12,366 $3,850,248 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 35   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. East-West , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. __________________________ Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. School-Parent Compact (SPC) East-West , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. “We, the school and parents agree to work cooperatively to provide a successful learning environment for all of our I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum children.” We will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas. We will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; We will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; I will monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities I will check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; I will encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; I will participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; I will communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; I will respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; I will become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; I will take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; I will share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. III. Student Responsibilities I will attend school regularly and arrive on time; I will complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; I will follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; I will show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 40  I will try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; I will always try my best to learn. I have received and read a copy of the East-West School of International Studies Parent Compact. I will maintain an ongoing and meaningful relationship with the school, and do my best to follow the compact. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III Supplemental Program funds will be used to provide individualized instructional support with the goals of 1) improving the passing rate of ELLs on the ELA Regents, 2) improving SAT scores for ELLS, and 3) improving overall English language proficiency as measured by annual NYSESLAT 1) On the 2018 June ELA Regents, 11 out of 18 English Language Learners scored lower than 65;non-passing scores ranged from a low of 4 to a high of 60. Those students need intense instructional support to help them master the reading and writing skills necessary to pass the ELA Regents. Students will be programmed in a Summer Academy in August 2018. The academy will take place on August 8, 9, 13, 14, and 15 from 9 AM to 12 PM and be led by a certified ENL teacher. Five of the 11 students, the ones who are not mandated for summer school, will be the target group.2) The direct instruction supplemental program will consist of SAT-prep sessions for 11th and 12th English Language Learners. Our ELLs historically have very low SAT scores relative to their GPA, putting them at a disadvantage for college admissions and competitive scholarships. The goal is to improve SAT scores for English Language Learners to increase higher education opportunities. The instruction will consist of 10 classes, one diagnostic test, and two practice tests. The classes will be led by one instructor who has completed an SAT prep training course with the A-List SAT Prep company. Each of the 10 classes will last 2 hours, and each practice and diagnostic test will run 4 hours. The language of instruction is English. Course materials will be A-List proprietary SAT exam prep books and practice exams. The dates of the classes will be Mondays and Wednesdays from 2:30-4:30 PM on the following dates: September 24, 26 October 1, 3, 9, 10, 15, 17, 22, 24, 29, 31 Diagnostic exams would take place September 22 and October 27 from 2:30-5:30 PM. 3) We will provide targeted instruction for ESL students in the morning, after school, and on Saturdays. Students will receive instruction from a certified ESL teacher on speaking, listening, reading, and writing to improve their overall English skills and make progress as measured by NYSESLAT results and progress in core courses. The class will be led by 4 certified ENL teachers. One teacher will be responsible for supplemental instruction for students in grades 6-8. A different teacher will be teach students in grades 9 and 10. A different teacher will support ELLs in grade 11. The fourth teacher will provide additional support to 12th grade students. The dates and times of the sessions are TBD but expected to take place on the first Saturday of each month from 9-12 (one teacher), each Wednesday after school (2 teachers,) and each Thursday and Friday morning (one teacher.) The first session will start Wednesday, October 3, 2018. Sessions will end June 8, 2019. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ENL teaching staff are relatively new, including one second-year teacher and one fourth-year teacher. The teachers have reported struggling with teaching in the integrated model of ENL/ELA. Specifically, the teachers have asked for support in establishing language acquisition objectives that are appropriate for an integrated classroom. We plan to send all 4 of our ESL teachers to outside training sessions and intervisitations to other school, with debrief meetings scheduled to occur after each. The ENL Department Chair will start by attending training on August 13, 2018 for NYSITELL from 9:30 AM-12:30 PM. The ENL Department Chair will also professional development sessions around NYSESLAT; sessions will focus on best practices for administering the speaking portion of the NYSESLAT and a norming activity before scoring commences. The speaking training will occur on April 8, 2019 within the regular work day. The norming activity will take place on May 20, 2019, from 3:40 PM- 5:00 PM. All ENL certified teachers will participate in other outside professional development throughout the year as the sessions are announced. The goal is to improve the quality of integrated co-taught ENL instruction as well as improve the practice of Stand-alone ENL instruction. All attendance and agenda documentation will be kept on file by the payroll secretary. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Limited English Proficiency parents often face difficulty supporting their children and advocating for them due to their own lack of English proficiency. We will hold English language and culture classes geared toward Limited English Proficiency parents. The classes will consist of 4 sessions that are 3 hours each in length, taught by 3 of our school's NYS-certified ENL teachers in rotation. Parents will be notified by announcements at PTA meetings, letters mailed home, posters on display in school, Parent Coordinator's Parent Newsletter, and school website notice. The sessions would take place from 9:30 AM-12:30 PM on the following dates: September 22 2018-19 CEP 44 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities October 6 October 27 November 10 Our Payroll Secretary will collect and archive invitations, agendas, and sign-in sheets. . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name East-West School of International Studies Borough Queens School Number 281 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Cromer Assistant Principal David Bantz Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michael DeMeo Teacher/Subject Area Judy Lee Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Jacobson Related-Service Provider Superintendent Juan Mendez School Counselor Carlos Diaz Parent Sharlene Tillett Parent Coordinator Maggie Torres Field Support Center Staff Member Samuel Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 684 2018-19 CEP 46 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.87%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. The ENL Department teachers assess literacy skills of our ELLs with the Performance Series, TCRWP Assessments, and textbook specific assessments. We currently use the Performance Series and the Acuity results to assist us in evaluating literacy skills. The data clearly shows that a number of our ELLs are struggling with reading. The school is working hard to support its staff in developing differentiation instruction that supports all ELLs from those that are newcomers and at the beginning level of proficiency ot those who have tested proficient on the NYSESLAT and receive transitional support. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 47  As the school shifts to the Common Core, the process of evaluation will require development and monitoring for effectiveness. For basic evaluation of student growth over time, pre- and post- assessment using the Performance Task will give the school an idea if reading levels are increasing. Proper evaluation of the program will include assessments in all four modalities, student and teacher evaluations, and all State assessment results including the ELA Exam, NYSESLAT, Performance tasks, and the ELA Regents. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Regents results have shown that ELLs do better with Native Language translated versions than in English. We have a small group of ELLs who take the Regents exams only in English because the tests are not translated in their home language. In terms of the English Regents, our ELLs who are passing are these who have been supported specifically with a focus on reading and writing, and whose reading/writing modality proficient levels are Advanced. A number of these students also tested out on the NYSESLAT. Our long term ELLs still continue to struggle with passing the English Regents and it remains a barrier to graduation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT shows that some students performed higher on the test than they are able to in class. Based on this data, we have adjusted a few students' programs so that they are receiving additional support either more classes or extended day support. In contrast, some students who scored at the beginning level on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are capable of higher proficiency level work in class, and teaches are differentiating accordingly. Data shows that a few of our students at the beginning level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT moved up one proficiency level were scheduled accordingly. Their true level is lower than other students at that proficiency level. A number of our students need intense support in academic English: reading and writing at the high school level. Some of our ELLs scored higher than their proficiency level; when using English in speaking and writing English in an authentic situation, they are not able to perform novel tasks. We are providing these students with additional support in extended day periods. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. EWSIS has a free-standing ENL program for middle school and high school. Students are grouped by proficiency level on 2018-19 CEP 48  grades 6- 12 and divided into middle school classes and high school classes. We are primarily using an integrated model, with most ESL students in content classes with a push-in ESL teacher as required by CR Part 154. All beginner and low intermediate level ELLs in grades 6- 12 have one daily stand alone ENL class. All other ESL classes are the integrated model in which ESL teachers push into content areas. This integrated model goes from the beginning level to advanced students. EWSIS has an ENL Department comprised of four, certified ESL Teachers. Class periods are 42 minutes long, and students receive 1, 2, or 3 periods of ENL per day based on their level of proficiency. Students at the Advanced Commanding level also receive two period, 45 minutes, of ELA instruction per week. ENL classes are integrated are much as the schedule permits. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students entitled to ESL are programmed according to their proficiency level and the mandated number of minutes as per CR Part 154. Beginning level students are programmed for three instructional periods per day which equals the mandated number of minutes. Intermediate level students are provided with two periods of ESL per day; the number of minutes is equal to mandates. Advanced level students are programmed for one period of ESL and one period of ELA per day; this fulfills the mandated number of minutes. Entering and Emerging students have 5 periods a week of stand-alone instruction with another 180 minutes or more of integrated instruction. Our higher level expanding students largely have at least 180 minutes of integrated instruction. All of our Commanding students receive 90 minutes or more of integrated ENL/ ELA content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELLs follow their grade level programs in the content areas. Content teachers are being supported with professional development so that they can differentiate instruction and meet the diverse needs of the ELLs in their classes. Differentiation of instruction focuses on access to content and methods of assessment. Students are provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. When applicable, students receive Regents content materials in their first language as well as English. Teachers provide ELLs with modified tasks that ensure they will receive the same content in a way that is accessible and is at their level English proficiency. Students are supported with visual and written scaffolding as well as oral/auditory and tactile support when appropriate and applicable. EWSIS is also fortunate to have a team of content teachers who are part of a professional learning community focused on meeting the needs of ELLs at EWSIS. This team of five core content teachers differentiate in the following ways: adapted texts, written scaffolding of academic vocabulary, visual and tactile support of content concepts, and modified assessments. All members of this group also receive individualized coaching with the Staff Developer. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For students whose first language is Chinese, Japanese, or Korean, our bilingual ESL teachers and our Japanese, Korean, and Chinese foreign language teachers assess the first language literacy of our newly admitted ELLs with teacher-made assessments. We use support staff in other languages, such as Spanish and Greek. 2018-19 CEP 49  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) SIFE identified students are supported by a guidance program that ensures their social-emotional as well as academic needs are being met. Student receive additional support through the extended day program, and the ESL Department discusses these students weekly as per their needs, academic and language development, and how best to support them across the school day. Staff is informed of who these students are and how best to support their language and learning needs. b) Our newcomers are supported by an intensive ESL program which comprises three-four of their seven or eight instructional periods. This program focuses on building their English speaking, listening, reading and writing skills so that they are able to function in their content classes with differentiated support. c) Our program for ELLs who have received 4-6 years of service, follow the appropriate program as per their proficiency level and receive additional support in extended day. These students are encouraged to participate in after school tutoring and other academic programs. d) Our program for ELLs who have received over 6 years of service, follow the appropriate program as per their proficiency level and receive additional support in extended day. These students are encouraged to participate in after school tutoring and other academic programs. Extended time rooms are available each day for students to use for tests and quiz extended time accommodations. e) Former ELLs for two years are given testing accommodations, including extended time on all tests and quizzes, including state tests (such as regents exams). Former ELLs (commanding level) are given 90 minutes of integrated ENL services each week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies include activating prior knowledge, bridging knowledge, modeling, and scaffolding; instructional materials include leveled fiction and non-fiction trade books that support content subject area topics. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs at East-West receive the appropriate services as per their IEP. ELL-SWDs receive IEP-specific services and are programmed in ICT, SETSS, and general education classes including ESL as per their IEP. Our school has seven instructional periods, lunch, and extended day. EWSIS has ELA and Math ICT classes and SETSS small group instructional periods. Depending on the IEP, an ELL-SWD could be in five general education instructional periods with non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. This school year, we are considering adopting RIGOR. This program supports the students for whom reading in English has been a challenge. Many of these students read at a low elementary level. EWSIS uses the Heinle Milestone intervention program with our struggling beginning and intermediate level ELLs as a literacy intervention conducted during AIS and extended day classes. We use RTI Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions in ELA, math, science, and social studies. Tier 3 interventions are provided during AIS and extended day; at this time, the school uses the Heinle program mentioned above. 2018-19 CEP 50  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have added two new classes to support our transitional ELLs, one on the middle school and one on the high school level. We are considering the addition of one to two English language support classes specifically for our 11th and 12th grade ELLs that focus on oral fluency and college-level writing. We will be having smaller classes that are more targeted at the age and ability level. We also have a wider variety of high needs classes with ENL teacher support, such as Global History. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school has not discontinued any programs. The school continues to build on the programs we have to support ELLs at EWSIS. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. After school programs are open to all students, and special attention is given to informing and encouraging ELLs to join after school programs and activities. ESL teachers actively reach out to students to join clubs and tutoring, most of which are designed with supports for ELLs in mind. We offer language based activities after school that explore the neighborhood, go on community trips (even Broadway plays), discuss American pop culture like music, TV and movies, allowing students from many backgrounds build up the American cultural knowledge along with the linguistic learning in a social setting. Tutoring is also available in all subjects, with supports for ELL students (many have an ESL teacher available in our testing center). Translated letters are mailed home about after school activities and automated phone calls with information are sent out in the home language of the students. EWSIS has the following curricular and extracurricular programs: Literacy lab, CHAMPS, high school sports teams (eg- soccer), middle school and high school dancing club, the Korean popular dance club, Model UN, student government, and the OST after school program at I.S. 237. During the Spring semester, EWSIS offers its ELLs content-specific after school small group instruction: math ELL tutoring, science ELL tutoring, English ELL tutoring, and History ELL tutoring. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school uses a variety of instructional materials and is in the process of expanding its resources. A big area is growth this year is to continue to build a leveled fiction and nonfiction library that meets the reading levels of ELLs across the school. The school is slowly building content resource materials to that students with beginning level English proficiency are still exposed to the same content material just on levels that are more accessible and in formats easier to follow. All classrooms have computer carts and SmartBoard technology available, allowing for differentiation for various learning styles, interactive lessons, audio and visual support. The technology available allows for greater access for all students, especially ELLs. Students use textbooks designed for ELLs, such as Reading to Writing, What a World, are used for beginning and intermediate levels and short but engaging readings like True Short Stories and young adult English books that are ideal for English Language Learners at the higher levels. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ENL program is primarily an English immersion program. Dictionaries and glossaries are provided to each student and computers to allow for reference. Otherwise, text is primarily in English. Translations are provided at times for content classes to support beginner students as needed. Some ESL teachers can provide clarification in home language as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 51  All services and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials and resources used with and by ELLs are secondary school level appropriate, eg- high interest, low reading level, and students are provided instructions and content learning that is on their grade level and age appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school uses a variety of instructional materials and is in the process of expanding its resources. A big area is growth this year is to continue to build a leveled fiction and nonfiction library that meets the reading levels of ELLs across the school. The school is slowly building content resource materials to that students with beginning level English proficiency are still exposed to the same content material just on levels that are more accessible and in formats easier to follow. All classrooms have computer carts and SmartBoard technology available, allowing for differentiation for various learning styles, interactive lessons, audio and visual support. The technology available allows for greater access for all students, especially ELLs. Students use textbooks designed for ELLs, such as Reading to Writing, What a World, are used for beginning and intermediate levels and short but engaging readings like True Short Stories and young adult English books that are ideal for English Language Learners at the higher levels. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). EWSIS has a summer bridge program to which all new students are invited. Summer bridge is both social and academic, and supports students in learning about each other, the school, transitioning from one level of schooling to the next, and being exposed to the unique language offerings of the school. The program is run by our student government under the supervision of a teacher, Effie Marinos. Other staff members support the program, such as Michael DeMeo (ESL teacher), and Mara Markinson (Math teacher). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? EWSIS students can take Chinese, Japanese, and Korean as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All staff - administrators, guidance counselors, pedagogues - at EWSIS receive professional development regarding meeting the needs of all students including ELLs monthly during regularly scheduled staff meetings. ESL teachers receive professional development once a week in their ESL Department meeting, and department chairs receive professional development on ELLs quarterly. EWSIS also has an ELL inquiry team, called TEAM ELL, which is a two part professional learning community: weekly professional development as a team and weekly one-on-one coaching. TEAM ELL is comprised of content area teachers and is facilitated by the ESL Coach. During the school year, ELL workshops will be offered to all content teachers during "Lunch and 2018-19 CEP 52  Learns" and after school. The school's assistant principals receive professional development from our Affinity Network, New Visions, and their principal's coach. PD's are planned throughout the year on every Monday of the school year. Teachers work in learning circles for 80 minutes, exploring issues like assessments, curriculum planning, differentiation, co-planning etc…. On Tuesdays, we have biweekly meetings of either grade or subject teams, allowing teachers to focus in on high needs ESL students or to work on how to differentiate curricula for ELLs. See above. Throughout the PDs run throughout the year, a focus on integrated Common Core standards into the curriculum has been pervasive for all subjects, but notably ENL. We have had sessions looking at CCLS for literacy and how that can be integrated across the curricula in addition to integrating content standards into each classes curricula. Activities can include looking at specific areas of the common core, such as including evidence to support an answer, and then exploring a range of ways this standard can be incorporated into a lesson. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Guidance Department provides professional development on transitions: elementary to middle and middle to high as we are a 6-12 school. During Advisory periods, guidance counselors support the academic program in terms of transitional expectations and descriptions of what the next level of schooling will be like. Summer Bridge Program supports our 8th graders going to 9th grade. This program provides team building and social-emotional support activities for transitioning to the high school level. Staff is provided with professional development prior to Summer Bridge that entails understanding the developmental and physical changes that children are going through at this transitional stage of schooling. The specific needs of ELLs: language acquisition, cultural acclimation, and schooling adjustment is given direct attention during the professional development. Our guidance counselors will be attending professional development to strengthen the support of ELLs at both the middle and high school levels in the following areas: social-emotional support for ELLs who are new to both the grade level and school environment; college application process for ELLs; Regents' preparation; sensitivity training to the needs of new immigrant students; ELL acclimation from elementary to middle school; overcoming the linguistic challenges of providing counseling services to ELLs. All staff receives 45 minutes of professional development every month, plus a minimum of 2 hours of professional development focused on ELLs learning needs during whole school professional development days: Election Day and Chancellor’s Day. All professional development agendas, attendance sign-in sheets, and PD materials are maintained in the assistant principal's and staff developer's files. Our school posts professional development resources for ELLs on our school's website. Our 7.5 hours of required ELL PD is covered by: our school's Professional Development Monthly Meetings, Election Day PD and Chancellor's Day PD. Records of activities are maintained in a PD binder, including sign in sheets, agendas, and sample materials. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents will be invited annually to one-on-one meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program. ENL teachers reach out to parents to invite them to the annual meeting along with translated letters that are sent home in the home 2018-19 CEP 53  language. Our support staff of translators provides language support at the meetings ensures that parents of ELLs understand the information and discussion at the meetings. With the support of Ms. Torres, parent coordinator, translated letters are sent home to all ELL families requesting that they specify if translation or interpretation services are needed; that information is logged on a school-wide google doc indicating what ELL parents need so that they can participate in school meetings and events as well as phone conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Staff reaches out to our ELL parents to encourage their children's attendance in special, ELL-related tutoring after school for science and mathematics. Phone calls in the parents first language are made to parents regarding their child's progress and parents are invited to come to the school for conferences, meetings, and special events. Currently the school is looking for partnership opportunities that will broaden opportunities for parents and expand the school resources for outreach and support to its families. Parent workshops are offered monthly and follow the PTA Meeting on Saturdays. Annual school events such as Culture Night, The Talent School, Diversity Day, graduation ceremonies, etc are geared towards the needs of our ELL families, always including translation. The school has a Parent Coordinator to work with the PTA and the school community in supporting all parents, including ELL families and their needs. The school has a parent handbook which is distributed to families at the beginning of the year. One Chinese-speaking parent, volunteers two days a week and works with our bilingual school aide to send out translated school information by phone, mail, and School Messager. Translation services are provided at each PTA meeting which ensures that parents of ELLs understand the information and discussion at the meetings and workshops. Financial aide, Skedula and PupilPath workshops are provided to parents following the PTA meeting, and parents of ELLs are encouraged to come by automated, translated invitations and are provided with translation services. With the support of Ms. Torres, translated letters are sent home to all ELL families requesting that they specify if translation or interpretation services are needed; that information is logged on a school-wide google doc indicating what ELL parents need so that they can participate in school meetings and events as well as phone conferences. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ben Sherman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ben Sherman Title Principal Kent Kleiman Assistant Principal Maggie Torres Parent Coordinator Michael DeMeo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Denise Eng Judy Lee Carlos Diaz Juan Mendez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q281 School Name: East-West School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Survey, Student Emergency Contact cards, and annual survey conducted by the Parent-Teacher Association and the Parent Coordinator are reviewed to determine preferred method of communication of parents for both oral and written communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Chinese, Spanish, Bengali, Korean, Japanese 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, after-school program information, New York State testing dates, Parent-Teacher Association letters and bi-weekly postcard announcements are all translated and disseminated by hard copy to parents by being sent home with students. School website also includes translations of announcements. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences, held four times per year in September, November, March, and May; Parent-Teacher Conferences, held monthly; Financial Aid Workshop, held in December; IEP meetings; First Fridays, in which parents are invited interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 58  to visit the school once a month. Anticipated informal interactions include parent-contact time, phone calls advising parents of student attendance, and phone blasts advertising upcoming events. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Notification Requirements are fulfilled and available in visible locations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Coordinator conducts outreach to parents to confirm that parents are receiving and understand messages sent out; school will conduct survey to assess parent satisfaction with translation options available. 2018-19 CEP 59 
