2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q285 School Name: WORLD JOURNALISM PREPARATORY: A COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Principal: JANINE WERNER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information World Journalism Preparatory School 25Q285 342500011285 6-12 34-65 192 nd St. Flushing NY 11358 718-461-2219 School Number (DBN): 718-461-2633 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Janine Polla Werner JWerner2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Janine Polla Werner Kenneth Mengani PaulaFreyeisen Robert Thompson N/A Seth Breland Nicole Freyeisen; Justine Cora CBO Representative: N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent: Linden Place ElaineLindsey Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: ELinds@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-741-5852 Fax: 718-741-5852 Field Support Center (FSC) Queens Plaza North LawrencePendergast FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Janine PollaWerner Kenneth Mengani Paula Freyeisen Seth Breland; Justine Cora Thomas Monaghan; Nicole Freyeisen Daniel Petrotta Linda Post Robert Thompson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Martinez Amy Sceiczina Jennifer Bayer Amy Chim Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of World Journalism Preparatory school is to prepare every child for success in college and life through the power and control of language. Through the pursuit of answers to learner curiosities, students defend and support informed opinion through writing, thoughtful discussion, purposeful reading and analysis for full participation in the global community and American democracy. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. World Journalism Preparatory School is a premiere secondary school dedicated to the practices and habits necessary to make learning public. Journalism is a discipline which, by its very nature, requires skills of observation, literacy, and critical thinking to make sense of the world; to establish the size and intensity of the events, people, places of modernity in perspective with all of human history and learning. Through this consistent focus and application of journalistic practices, students are prepared to commit to and participate in our democracy. Ultimately, only these practices will preserve the democracy. Unlike many “themed” schools, WJPS is true to the core of its mission. In all things, WJPS students participate in the publication of their learning. One way this is done is through the integration of journalism into all grade levels and content areas. Curriculum is infused with making learning public. Our curriculum revolves around collaborative projects, individual and group presentations, and strong writing. Students research, create, and present projects which are rigorous and showcase transfer of knowledge to new situations and learning. The student produced publications which are at the center of the school, showcase student development and achievement. All students are expected to contribute and produce publications such as The Blazer – school online newspaper, The Highlight – WJPS school news broadcast station, and The school yearbook. Student centered pedagogy is at the heart of all things so students own their learning. In addition, students know they have built and continue to build the traditions that make up the tenor and climate of WJPS. Students also publish their work in Showcase Electronic Porfolios. A well-defined process of Collection, Selection, and Reflection results in student exhibitions of their work two times a year. Seniors must complete a comprehensive presentation of their growth through a careful analysis of their work over time and across content. At all exhibition points, students are provided feedback from peers, teachers, and family. In preparation for the exhibition, students take part in a rigorous self-assessment and goal setting process. Every piece of student work acts as an assessment by teachers who use the information from those assessments to modify, differentiate, and revise curricular decisions. Assessment for learning (AFL) practices are deeply embedded into the daily work of teachers and students as data collection and in-process assessment. All of this leads to a College Ready environment where all students, grades 6-12, know they are preparing for college and career. Through our well-defined practices students learn to own their learning, speak up when they struggle, and work to master standards. Our rigorous and engaging curriculum is aligned to current standards in all subjects and across grade levels and promotes college and career readiness for our students. We are building on the academic rigor inherent in internalizing and applying content and processes to authentic real-world problems – those things that go beyond state assessments. Attention to Formative Assessment for Learning engages all learners in the process of achieving mastery. Through our consistent portfolio process, WJPS students are adept and knowledgeable about their strengths and growth areas which in turn set them up for a successful college and career experience. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  18% of WJPS students have IEPs. 69% of students with IEPs require full-time ICT to address their learning needs. The needs of our students with disabilities in our ICT classes vary depending on cognitive, academic and social functioning levels, yet all students are appropriately grouped so that their needs are met. ICT provides students the opportunity to be educated alongside their non-disabled peers with the full-time support of a special education teacher to assist in adapting and modifying instruction. As described in the NYC Continuum of Services for Students with Disabilities, Integrated Co-Teaching “ensures that students master specific skills and concepts in the general education curriculum, as well as ensuring that their special education needs are being met, including meeting alternate curriculum goals.” 25% of our students with IEPs require SETSS and receive specially-designed instruction (SDI) from a special education teacher in a separate location. The SDI provided enables students to be educated alongside their non-disabled peers. These students receive their regular instruction in a non-ICT general education setting. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We surpassed our 2017-2018 Rigorous Instruction goal. We had anticipated a 3 point increase in student scores on the DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) by June. Our middles school students demonstrated an average increase of seven points, the equivalent of two grade levels in reading proficiency. In addition, our scores on the Algebra 1 Regents improved, with 80% of 8th graders passing and 75% of 9th graders passing. 60% of 8th graders and 62% of 9th graders achieved college readiness. We achieved our Collaborative Teachers goal with all of our teachers showing improvement in domain 3d of the Danielson Framework: Planning and Preparation. Teachers regularly collaborate to develop and share lesson and unit plans. We made great progress toward our Supportive Environment goal, with 70% positive responses to the Guidance section of the Learning Environment Survey, a 9% increase. A key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is ensuring that instruction is intellectually engaging, meaningful and rigorous across subjects and grade levels and that instruction is carefully and strategically designed to promote quality instruction.  All classrooms follow a workshop agenda (Learning Target, Mini-Lesson, Differentiated Work Period with workstations, and Closing.  Classroom activities are student-centered and scaffolded. Students conference with teachers to improve performance. Students have multiple entry points and choice of rigorous texts as well as ways to interact with those texts through discussion, writing, and menus.  Assessment for Learning (AFL) practices are used across all grade levels and content areas. Exit/entrance tickets, student assessment notebooks for self-assessment and meta-cognition. Submission of student work to EPortfolio. Extensive use of Technology is reflected in all classrooms, all student work, and student control of portfolios. EPortfolios reflect extensive student writing processes concentrating on revision and publication and extensive use of technology.  Teachers work together in grade teams and department teams using a tuning protocol to improve lessons, analyze student data and create grading policies that are aligned to Academic Policy. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q285 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 567 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 58 53 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 56.0% % Attendance Rate 48.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 35.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 43.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.84 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 98% 96.6% 15.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 121 118 8 92.8% 7.9% 18.7% 3.7% 15.0% 1.9% 4 43% 5.4 44.9% 85% 99% 97% 98.9% 37% N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Schools Strength: According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, our school's use of resources and organizational decision-making are well-aligned to and support the school’s instructional goals. Across classrooms, teachers provide a learning target, a mini-lesson, differentiated work periods for students in stations, and a lesson wrap up that includes students demonstrating their mastery of the learning target. In planning lessons most teachers include multiple entry points and differentiated tasks in accordance with the school goal of implementing Universal Design for Learning. In 2017-18, 60% of 8th graders and 62% of 9th graders achieved college readiness on the Algebra 1 Regents. Priority Need: According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, teachers have yet to strategically plan higher level cognitive tasks for the highest-achieving students. On the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 46% of students said that they are challenged in their classes (Q5a) and 43% said that their teachers ask difficult questions in class. In addition, 54% said that they learn a lot from feedback on their work. These data trends point to our need to ensure that curriculum and classroom instruction are rigorous and set high expectations for students while ensuring that individual needs are met. Data from 2017-18 Regents demonstrate a need increase scores on advanced mathematics Regents examinations, including Geometry (54% pass rate)l and Agebra 2 (42% pass rate). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. MATH AND SCIENCE FOCUS By June 2019, the college-readiness rate on both the Geometry and Algebra 2 Regents examinations will increase by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 13 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers, math coach, Administrators PL Team; Vertical Team Leads; Administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Strategy 1: Regular professional development through:  The Queens North Field Support Center  Teacher's College  Algebra 4 All (strengthening foundational algebraic Administration Students performance) Strategy 2: Engaging teachers in common unit and lesson planning to ensure rigor and multiple entry points for all learners, meaningful formative assessment and engaging learning activities Strategy 3: Providing students with additional support in the form of peer and teacher tutoring and on-line resources Strategy 4: Teachers Teachers will track and monitor student performance and use data to plan extensions and interventions Administration Students September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers, math coach, administrators, team leads Strategy 5: Learning walks with teachers and administrators to assess efficacy of learning activities using HESS's Cognitive Rigor Matrix 2018-19 CEP 14  Strategy 6: Periodic team meetings to reflect and adjust practices as dictated by student needs assessed in individual classrooms. Strategy 7: Teachers will collaborate in vertical teams using the Tuning Protocol to improve lessons, ensuring they are aligned to the school's instructional focus. Strategy 8: After-school tier 3 intervention facilitated by special educators with a specialty in mathematics will be established to support students in need to focused, small group instruction. Engaging Families: Parent workshops by school staff will be held to teach parents how to participate in their student’s achievement. Topics to include: 1. College and Career Readiness Indicators 2. Using Pupil Path to monitor student progress 3. Student self-assessment and reflection at home 5. Portfolio basics for parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement PL to include parent education in PL Handbook Parent Coordinator; PL Team; Vertical Team Leads; Administration Classroom Teachers Students Parents How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging Families: Parent workshops by school staff will be held to teach parents how to participate in their student’s achievement. Topics to include: 2018-19 CEP 15  1. College and Career Readiness Indicators 2. Using Pupil Path to monitor student progress 3. Student self-assessment and reflection at home 5. Portfolio basics for parents 6. Workshops for parents facilitated by mental health professionals, motivational speakers and WJPS alumni on topics such as communicating with teenagers, coping with challenges, being optimistic, mindfulness. Workshops can include TedTalks Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Pupil Path is an expenditure for Datacation. Send staff to borough professional learning offerings. Google sites house the ePortfolio with minimum money. Kahn Academy for intervention, tutorials, and homework. After school tutoring Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, college readiness percentage will increase by 3% as measured by mock Regents examinations in Geometry and Algebra 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Regents examination Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A unique feature of WJPS is that many of our students graduate after having been here since sixth grade. This seven year arc helps build a culture of mutual trust, collaboration and support. Enrollment data shows that many students who enter the school for the first time in ninth grade had applied for sixth grade, but were not matched. Their tenacity and commitment to becoming WJPS students is a positive influence on our school culture. These new students are welcomed seamlessly into the school community, strengthening a legacy of academic and personal growth. Students recognize and appreciate the college preparatory education they receive at WJPS, as evidenced by the 86% positive response to the LES question 10b: "Adults encourage them to continue their education after high school." 2017-2018 saw an increase in support of students through our implementation of Naviance, a college and career readiness technology program that offers individualized research options. We celebrated our first cohort of seniors in the WISE Internship program where students spent out of school working and learning in the real world. Students across all grades were able to enjoy and learn from College Access for All activities such as College Application Week, Career Day, Road to College Family Meetings, College Finance Night and College Decision Day. In 2017-2018, 95% of WJPS high seniors graduated, and of those, 93% applied to college. In the Guidance area of the LES for 2017-2018, positive response rates rose by 10% to 71%, but there is still much work to be done regarding questions about adult support for meeting future career goals, information about applying for college, and options for paying for college.Having met our 2017-2018 CEP Supportive Environment goal around Guidance, our focus will remain here since we are still 11% below District and City Averages (an increase of 10% from the year before). The WJPS community will continue to build on the Supportive Environment in the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be an 11% increase in student positive responses on the Supportive Environment section of the NYC School Survey regarding Guidance. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All high school advisory classes will meet together auditorium style once a month so that key issues can be presented as a whole, then unpacked in smaller groups.  Advisory classes will dig deeper into Naviance, with emphasis on plans for future career goals and researching which colleges will meet those goals.  Guidance counselor and AP host "Road to College" evenings for grades 9-12, September through December. Seniors have the choice of enrolling in the WISE program.  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff; teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 PD Committee & Staff All school staff, parents, guidance counselors, administration including but not limited to: Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTA President and Executive Board. Administration and Student Government All school staff, parents, administration including but not limited to: Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTA President and Executive Board. During the fall of 2018, a survey will be distributed to students as it relates to their expectations and experiences of adult support about preparing for life after high school. Through workshops and PTA meetings held during the school year, parents will learn how to support their students in planning for college and career readiness. The SLT will help design a parent survey to determine areas to address. Students Fall 2018 Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Hosted by Guidance Counselors and the Assistant Principal, Road to College Meetings for Families are scheduled for September through December. Naviance training for parents will be provided by teachers and the AP, scheduled on 2018-19 CEP 18  Tuesdays during Parent Engagement time. The Parent Coordinator will provide training in the evenings before the Road to College Meetings and some PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will be funded through College Access for All (CA4A), donated by the PTA or are already available at school. There will be use of Per Session funds to through CA4A to carry out plans. Staff schedules will allow for implementation and review of these surveys during PD sessions and Parent Engagement time. SLT meetings will also allow for time to review survey responses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in positive student responses in a school created survey based on the supportive environment section on the NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created survey based on the supportive environment section on the NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The QR of 2017-2018 identified teacher collaboration as a well-developed aspect of the school. Specifically, it states that “Teachers benefit from participating in professional collaborations and distributed leadership structures that foster reflection as well as provide opportunities for researching effective instructional techniques that focus on improved student achievement.” The collaborative nature of our school is a strength that we use to improve student achievement at all levels and in all content areas. The 2018 Learning Environment Survey score for Collaborative Teachers was 4.22, .42 higher than the borough-wide average and .47 higher than the city-wide average. It is important that we leverage this strength to improve an area of need demonstrated in the most recent PPO and the Learning Environment survey. Both measures demonstrate that students need support in making instruction more relevant and rigorous. While the student responses on the LES were generally positive in the Collaborative Teachers section, 69% of students said that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday experiences.This is also corroborated by Advance data in domain 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. The total average score in Component 3c for 2017-2018 was 3.04 (the mid-point of "Effective"). To support teacher collaboration, a professional resource room for teachers has been established. This room (330B) is equipped with technology and practical resources and serves as a meeting place for grade teams, ICT partners and department teams to meet, engage in inquiry, utilize tuning protocols, plan instruction and monitor data. This collaboration will be regular and systematic and focus on improving learning outcomes through making instruction more relevant and engaging. In addition, administrative assignments (C-6) have been redesigned to support common planning time, and Monday professional development afternoons are dedicated to subject area and grade team collaborations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be a .5 increase on Danielson Domain 3D: Engaging Students in Learning. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning will serve as the vehicle for planning and implementation. Sept. 2018- 1. Monday Professional Learning sessions will be dedicated to teachers working in collaborative groups participating in one of the following: Lesson Tuning, Unit Planning, Interdisciplinary Planning. This work has as its focus the WJPS Instructional Focus: to increase students' intellectual engagement through designing and delivering coherent instruction. Vertical teams, all teachers, PD committee, administration June 2019 PD Committee Teachers, Administration 2. Professional Learning will include supporting teachers around planning for students with disabilities using the IEPs as the foundation, with special focus on management needs. Paraprofessionals will participate in this professional learning. 3. Teachers will engage in Critical Friends Groups where they share lessons and receive warm and cool feedback 4. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations where they can observe how planning coherent instruction is implemented in the classroom. Teachers can access a shared calendar where they can indicate when they would be open to a collegial visit. 4. Teachers will convene after progress reports to develop Student Action Plans for students who are not making progress. Analysis of data from scholarship reports and ePortfolio submissions, parent workshops focused on supporting students with self-evaluation and reflection. Data Specialist, Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator, June 2019 Administration, Admin. Dept. Teacher leaders, parents Teachers, Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will write excerpts for the the family newsletter highlighting grade and subject level important topics and topics of interest.They will also invite parents in on Tuesday afternoons for workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning time, Lunch and Learns, and other communication with teacher teams will not require extra budgeting. Teacher visitations of classrooms will require a limited amount of coverages. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a .3 increase in the overall teacher rating in Danielson component 3c as measured by Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administrators lead Professional Learning with the members of the Professional Learning Team. Teachers, in consultation with administrators, set goals for their learning based on scholarship reports, assessment data, Regents pass and mastery rates, and attendance data. In observation debriefs and mid-year conferences, administration and teachers monitor progress on learning goals. Along the way, there are timely opportunities for teachers to discuss next steps and needs to improve their instruction thereby promoting emotional support for teachers. Curriculum development and teacher collaboration were noted as a well-developed area of our last quality review. These practices need to continue to strengthen. According to the 2018 Learning Environment Survey, the Effective School Leadership score was 4.28 and the responses were 93% positive. A deeper look at the data revealed that improvement is needed in the area of Program Coherence. 90% of the teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in the classroom. This is sub-domain that had the lowest score. While the professional learning opportunities have been focused around teacher planning, more teachers need more discretion in the materials and resources they use. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, There will be a 10% increase in the Teacher Influence section of the School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Meetings with departments regarding the effectiveness of curriculum materials, teachers' comfort level with these materials, alignment to the standards, and level of scaffolding and differentiation inherent. Teachers and Sept. 2018– June 2019 Professional Learning Team; Vertical Team Leads; Administration Sept. 2018– June 2019 Administration; Teaching Staff; Teachers engage in sharing best practices and new learning they have received from outside professional learning experiences in order to generate ideas to enhance curriculum. Teachers Teachers and administrators will seek outside professional development opportunities from DOE approved organizations. Teachers and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018– June 2019 Review and discussion of sample copies and online resources of various curricula to determine instructional merit. Teachers Sept. 2018– June 2019 Family newsletter will include excerpts from grade teams informing families of the units, projects and activities generated by teachers. Teacher and families Sept. 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Team leaders Administration; PD Committee; Teaching Staff Administration Teaching Staff Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 24  WJPS families will develop a broader understanding of teacher decisions regarding the curriculum through communication with the principal, for example, coffee with the principal and inviting parents into classrooms. Parents will be invited to "coffee with the principal" to allow for broad discussions regarding the curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Team leaders assist in the development of professional learning as members of the PD Committee. NYSTL funds will be used to purchase curriculum materials vetted by teachers and administration PD funds will be allocated to provide teachers with professional learning around curriculum purchases Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, There will be a 5% increase in the Teacher Influence section of the School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. staff survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our most recent Quality Review found WJPS to be Well Developed in establishing a school culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations. To that end, 90% of parents replied positively in the Learning Environment Survey of 2016-2017 that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled Parent-Teacher Conference. 95% replied that WJPS communicates with them in a language and in a way they can understand, and 87% say they felt well informed by the communications they receive from WJPS. A priority for WJPS is to increase the degree that parents feel comfortable in our building. On the LES of 2016-2017, 58% of parents answered positively that were invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Through targeted and increased communication with families about our 2017-2018 Open School Week activities, this measurement increased to 71% on the 2017-2018 LES. We seek to build on this progress and also address the fact that only 65% of parents say they have the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a combined 10% increase on the LES in positive parent responses regarding classroom visits and opportunities to volunteer time to support WJPS. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Set up an online list of volunteer opportunities for parents - ranging from chaperoning field trips to participating in Career Day to helping in the school garden. Provide PD on Tuesday afternoons for teachers to support them in identifying volunteer opportunities in their classrooms and communicating these opportunities to parents. Teachers Initiate a parent "volunteer hour" to be held at least four times during the school year in the evening before a PTA meeting. Teachers and administrators will provide a wish list of activities: taking down bulletin boards, alphabetizing classroom library, etc. Parents Parent/Guardians Sept. 2018 Administration to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Teachers Administrators Transform schoolyard into a place for various community activities, such as a dog park or yoga in the yard. Parents, students, Spring 2019 administration, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. WJPS PTA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use the following resources: Office staff, teachers, parent coordinator and administrators Sign-Up.com online appointment system Tuesday Parent Engagement time 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, we will have 50 parents who have volunteered in school and/or visited classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign In sheets and Sign-Up.com registration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Did not earn credit. Listed as Promotion in doubt. Did not pass Regents exam. Received a Level 2 or below on statewide assessment. Has been identified as performing below standards by teachers. Did not earn credit. Listed as Promotion in doubt. Did not pass Regents exam. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group or 1-to-1 tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. Before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted reading and writing instruction. Flipped classrooms provide video tutorials. iLearn Standards based work and reassessments. Small group or 1-to-1 tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. Before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. Flipped classrooms provide video tutorials. Received a Level 2 or below on statewide assessment. iLearn Has been identified as performing below standards by teachers. 2018-19 CEP 29  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Did not earn credit. Listed as Promotion in doubt. Did not pass Regents exam. Received a Level 2 or below on statewide assessment. Has been identified as performing below standards by teachers. Did not earn credit. Listed as Promotion in doubt. Did not pass Regents exam. Received a Level 2 or below on statewide assessment. Has been identified as performing below standards by teachers. Recommended by staff to PPT Parent concerns Standards based work and reassessments. Small group or 1-to-1 tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. Before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. Flipped classrooms provide video tutorials. iLearn Targeted science reading and writing instruction. Standards based work and reassessments. Small group or 1-to-1 tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. Before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. Flipped classrooms provide video tutorials. iLearn Targeted social studies reading and writing instruction. Certified counselors, SBST have a developed needs based service. Certified counselors, SBST have a developed needs based service including 1-1. Scheduled as needed and available during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). none 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31 While we do not currently have any students in temporary housing, we are prepared to provide STH with uniforms, school supplies, social-emotional support, and academic intervention services 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. none 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Non-title 1 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Non-title 1 Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Non-TA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Non-TA 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Non-SWP 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Non-title 1 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. WJPS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. WJPS will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) WJPS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 38  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name World Journalism Preparatory School Borough Queens School Number 285 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Janine Werner Coach Kane Summerhayes ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Bernhardt Teacher/Subject Area Neal Reff/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Cecilia Patritti/Special Ed. Related-Service Provider Catherine Donovan Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Nancy Poulos Coach School Counselor Vincent Lumetta Parent Paula Freyeisen Parent Coordinator Helen Reed Field Support Center Staff Member Doshka Truick Other (Name and Title) Daniel Petrotta, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 43  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 598 Total number of ELLs 8 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formative assessment is obtained in a variety of ways. Most often, careful listening to student responses during group discussion is practiced to assess students understanding and responses. Teacher records observations, concerns, surprising details, skill strengths/weaknesses. In addition, graphic organizers, questioning, and entrance/exit tickets are used for assessment and align with instructional planning. The Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) is administered to middle school students and the results are used to purposefully group students and determine which students are eligible for Wilson Just Words. The formal assessments guide instructional planning. For example, the data collected from the teacher-created assessments will determine differentiation applied in grouping, text level of difficulty, amount of vocabulary words frontloaded, reading text aloud or independently, and amount of questions/writing assignments given. 2018-19 CEP 44  The formative assessments and/or curriculum-embedded assessments data informs our instructional planning for ELLs because it will be used when determining additional academic interventions offered by the school. Presently, our school offers a test-prep program for the ELA and math state exams and the Regents after school and/or on Saturdays. It also offers an additional small-group instruction to target groups such as ELL students during the day, and teacher/ peer tutoring is available during the lunch period. Our school encourages our teachers and our students to use certain online sources because they allow differentiated articles and offer strategies. Such sites are vocabulary.com, NEWSELA, NYTimes, Tweentribune, and Quizlet. Recent NYSESLAT data shows three of our students are transitional level, and five of our students are expanding. The students who took the NYS ELA test last year scored from 1.7-2.48. Therefore, data shows our students are not meeting the standards on state exams. Therefore, academic vocabulary, reading and test-taking strategies will be rigorous in this year's curriculum. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Class routines and rituals (using notebook, organizational table of contents, writing learning target, taking notes) are in place and help to support focused goals. Our ENL class size rarely exceeds 10 students so small group instruction is viable. School structures to support our guided planning for ELLs involves access to laptop computers and/or the computer lab, after school NYS ELA, math, and Regent test prep enrollment, library tutoring available during lunch period, ENL teachers will be trained with MSQI this year to implement effective new reading strategies and use data from the DRP to drive instruction in addition to periodic reading assessments with Performance Series. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments such as: the NYS ELA test scores, Regents scores, and the Performance Series are used to determine reading level and identify particular skills that need improvement. Our ELLs this year did not meet standards on their ELA state exam. Also, the students who took the performance series assessment last year, most scored below and/or far below reading level. Therefore, the data indicates there is a need for improvement of their reading and test-taking skills. Additional assistance as mentioned above such as tutoring, after-school test-prep classes will be given, as well as, in-class focus on vocabulary, reading skills, and identifying literary terms. In addition, we will be utilizing strategies demonstrated by MSQI program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In the ENL classroom, the teacher uses a multitude of texts. A large, diverse classroom library is available to students, Also differentiated readings are selected from texts and sites: Tweentribune, Ereading, Junior Scholastic, Flocabulary and Tweentribune for small group and/or independent reading. The texts acquired from the sites mentioned are used for supplemental reading materials. From the data, teacher can differentiate according to student's needs. Access to computer lab or computer cart allows for this intervention to take place. In addition, the ENL teacher will correspond with the content teachers to find out specific areas students need help in their classes. The summative data will pinpoint certain skills and areas to develop and adjust curriculum to meet the ELL students' needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Academic interventions for at-risk ELLs in grades 6-12 include lunchtime tutoring. The tutoring is given by a content teacher or by a peer. Our student ambassadors and student government members organize the tutoring schedule and availability. The students are recommended to tutoring based on assessments and need. Another academic intervention is after-school test-prep program for our middle school ELL students to help them prepare for the math and ELA state exams. At the high school level, students are offered Regents prep courses after school and on Saturdays. The courses include subjects such as algebra, geometry, global studies, American history, chemistry, and living environment. This year WJPS plans also to implement small guided groups for students at risk. The plan is to provide additional academic support in a group no larger than 10. The students will be selected after data is analyzed and academic intervention plan determined. Differentiation is also a part of 2018-19 CEP 45  teacher's daily planning to address the particular skill needs of the ELL students, as well as, the other students in the class. Differentiation may be facilitated with graphic organizer, small focus groups, modifications, and additional vocabulary support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Regents, and NYS math and ELA scores are used to inform our ELL programs. The outcome assessments are analyzed to determine our at risk students. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data will help teacher to determine level and amount of minutes needed of ENL instruction. It will also inform teachers so they are aware of the additional supports and strategies the ELL students will need in the classroom. The NYS math and ELA, as well as, the Regents score will determine small-group instruction classes for the ELL students performing below grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The information is disseminated by a careful analysis of the RLAT, RELC, posting results on Skedula, and collaboration between content teachers, administration, and the ENL teacher. Adjustments to student programs will happen when deemed necessary and beneficial to student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our class is a heterogeneous class of mixed proficiency levels. Our class includes the students who tested proficient on last year's NYSESLAT test. They attend twice a week while the others attend five days a week. Our stand-alone meets daily in the same room and period. The work is differentiated to their levels and grade-level curriculum. The ENL teacher also corresponds with content teachers to help assist the ENL students with their assignments, projects, and revisions. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school programming office understands and commits to ensuring the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in our program model. They use various reports provided by and discussed with the administration and teachers (RLEC, RLAT,RLER). STARS provides a cross examination to ensure all students are accounted for and proper service time is fulfilled. We currently have a freestanding ENL program. Students attend the class taught by a certified ENL/ELA teacher for 90 minutes (2x a week) or 180 minutes (5x a week). If a student needs more than 180 minutes and student is in the sixth grade, the ELA teacher is dually certified in ENL, so student will receive instruction with ELL supports. In the seventh and eighth grade, there is another dually certifed teacher who will provide additional mandated minutes. In high school, our Spanish teacher is dually certified and student will be scheduled to his small group instruction group to ensure student receives mandated minutes. 2018-19 CEP 46  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. IN the content area subject, teachers incorporate ESL strategies to satisfy the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The strategies implemented to address the needs of the English Language Learners are: use of mnemonic devices to help with memorization, use of visualization to help students focus, provide multiple visual learning techniques (images, illustrations, highlighting, underlining, different color pens/pencils), Power Point presentations, videos), use of structured notebook for writing down information and pasting informative handouts, use categorizations or grouping to facilitate memory, use chunking to adequately recall sequences of numbers and other types of information, use reauditorization rehearsal, have students think of words that mean the same thing, etc. Available to our ELLs are native language glossaries, word walls, native language dictionaries, and student buddy systems. The content is delivered in the workshop model in our ENL program. The ENL program is taught by a dually certified teacher (ENL/ELA). Presently there is no co-teaching class for ENL. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are properly evaluated in their native language by having a second assessor available. For example, they may collaborate with another staff member who speaks/reads/understands the student's native language to help with the assessment process. If one can not be found, the proper DOE channels will be used to have the assessment properly translated for evaluative purposes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE-Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education status is determined using New York State's resources available on NYSED's website: http://nysed.gove/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife . Also we will assess the student to determine grade level performance in math and reading with the Performance Series program. They will be provided any additional supports available such as tutoring, small group instruction period, and/or after-school test preparation classes. We will translate text with Google translate or online language dictionaries. We will provide student with a dictionary if possible. Also in the classroom, netbook computers are accessible for translating and helping to show images of certain vocabulary words student may be struggling with. The content teachers are provided with glossaries, and they provide translated text if available. Lastly, student is paired with a buddy/another student proficient in both languages to help assist the newcomer with instructions and guidance. c.Developing-all of the above assistance can be provided if needed. Independence is encouraged by promoting participation and taking the steps forward to becoming a more active learner in whole class discussions. Modifications for length or amount of citations may be adapted to essay or reading requirements. b. Newcomer-we will translate text with Google translate or online language dictionaries. We will provide student with a dictionary if possible. Also in the classroom, netbook computers are accessible for translating and helping to show images of certain vocabulary words student may be struggling with. The content teachers are provided with glossaries, and they provide translated text if available. Lastly, student is paired with a buddy/another student proficient in both languages to help assist the newcomer with instructions and guidance. c.Developing-all of the above assistance can be provided if needed. Independence is encouraged by promoting participation and taking the steps forward to becoming a more active learner in whole class discussions. Modifications for length or amount of citations may be adapted to essay or reading requirements. d.Long Term-we work in small groups, practice choral reading, focus on vocabulary development, and assist when we can in their content areas. Often they need extra help in mining text and directions for task or class projects. in addition, when possible, our horizontal teams try to develop cross-curricular learning to help our diverse learners. e.Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: our plan is to ensure they are continuing to receive their testing 2018-19 CEP 47  accommodations. They will be receiving 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. After assessments and communication with their teachers, we try to focus on content areas they need the most assistance to succeed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Small group, one-to-one, whole class instructional strategies are used on a rotating basis. The workshop model is used in our classrooms. Because our ENL is small, we are able to conference often about work and progress. The grade-level materials are provided by their content teachers, as well as, a classroom library, computer and writing center is available at lunchtime every day. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? WJPS's teachers use differentiation in our curricular and instructional development in order to meet the multiple needs of our ELLs-SWDs. Our ENL classroom allows a lot of space and various seating configurations to promote the least restrictive environment. ENL and content area teachers articulate to design a strategic plan for students taking the ELA/Math and Regents exams. Students who seek additional help are tutored/mentored during our TURBO or Regents Test Prep classes after school, or in some cases, during lunch periods with content teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. WJPS will offer our targeted groups such as ELLs support in ELA, math, and other content areas after-school test preparations and weekend Regents prep classes. These supports will be offered in English, however, glossaries and student buddies are available as needed. We will also inform our students about the DELLSS College and Career Readiness program being offered at Queens College. It will be focusing on English, Math, and SAT/ACT/TOEFL preparation. Furthermore, if there are any workshops or events mentioned in the weekly newsletter, News and Opportunities for Educators of ELLs, ENL teacher will share information with appropriate students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? WJPS will be partaking in many new programs as a means to continue our commitment to progress for all. Firstly, we will be collaborating with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). The goal of MSQI is to "ensure that all children entering 9th grade can read on or above grade level and are firmly on the path to high school, college, and career success." Our middle school teachers and ENL teacher will be working closely with a coach provided by the MSQI team. The coach will be equipped with rigorous and engaging strategies to improve the reading and writing skills for all learners. Another new program is the Just Words program. Select ELLs will partake in the program. They will learn reading strategies through focusing on phonemic awareness, phonics, word study, and spelling. In addition, Algebra for All will be preparing our eighth-grade students for the rigors of high school. In high school, our AP program will expand, CUNY LINCT will help prepare students for college-level math, and the WISE program will give our seniors the experience of adulthood. WISE connects our vibrant community with organizations that have the expertise and resources to help students realize their potential and the amazing opportunities beyond WJPS. Lastly, WJPS will offer NYC Dept for Art Program designed specifically for our ELL and special education students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. All student government groups and clubs are open to all who want to join. After-school academic enrichment such as test prep and weekend Regents prep classes are also open to any student who wants the extra help provided by our staff members. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 48  WJPS provides ELLs access to computers to assist students with translation, vocabulary sites, grammar enrichment, homework site help, reading passage and comprehension skill work, homework site help, and for research purposes. In addition, teachers provide word walls, previews of vocabulary or content for front loading information, and vocabulary study cards. Classroom libraries contain multileveled books. All content area teachers maintain websites that have daily postings of class notes, work, supplemental videos and images to help students be successful. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are paired with native language speaking partners when possible. There are native language glossaries available. In addition, homework sites are posted on Google sites that translation is available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels by keeping abreast of the mandated policies updated in the ELL Handbook, as well as, regular communication between the ENL teachers and the ELLs' content teachers. The ENL teacher confers to provide appropriate support and Common Core alignment. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? WJPS shares the building with IS25 and P233. We share auditorium, lunchroom, gym, and library. Each school is allotted a fair distribution of periods in each location. In the library, all students may meet for tutoring, book clubs, computer work, and special events. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In late June, WJPS offers orientation prior to the next year for incoming students. During orientation, students are given explicit instructions and guidance about school expectations and regulations. Students ambassadors assist the students with a tour and present information about student organizations. Uniform companies are available for taking orders and answering questions. In addition, staff and PTA members are available to explain lunch procedures and paperwork that needs to be filled out. If the ELL student and family members need a translator one will be made available. We have a list of staff members who speak another language (principal, assistant principals, teachers, guidance counselors, office staff) and who volunteered to help with translation. The same tour and guidance will be available for the ELL student who enrolls throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In middle school, all students take a Latin course. In high school, students are offered Spanish language classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 49  Professional development for all ELL personnel will include an overview of the program, the students involved, and the best teaching practices recommended for ELLs' progress. WJPS' professional development sessions will include instruction in differentiation strategies, MSQI and Alegbra for All strategies, analyzing data, backward planning, and Danielson framework. All of the instruction development addresses ELLs and their needs for support and differentiated learning. For the non-pedagogic staff, alternate training will be offered to support understanding the linguistic needs as per the specific student's IEP and disability. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Plans for WJPS to meet the 15 % professional development requirements as per CR Part 154 will include presentations about best ELL strategies and current articles about the topic. Most of the new programs (MSQI and Math For Everyone) being implemented by the school this year recognize ELL students specific needs and will offer strategies to help them succeed as part of their program. ENL teachers will attend district, Teacher's College, or MSQI workshops to upgrade teaching with new progressive techniques offered by the workshop to meet the 50% ELL-specific professional development. Records for professional development activities will be kept with the school secretary and ENL teacher. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher communicates with the parent via phone, email, or letter to set up an appointment to discuss goals of the program, NYSESLAT results, language development progress and goals for the content areas. A translator will be provided by a few staff member or the DOE if needed. The records describing date, time, attendees, points discussed will be maintained by the ENL teacher and placed in the ENL folder in her classroom. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are involved in all school events, field trips, PTA and SLT meetings, and fundraisers. All of these activities foster ELL parent involvement because they are engaged in planning and participating in the event. At the dances, parents serve food and drinks, chaperone the dance floor, On the field trips, parents are in charge of a small group of students. At the PTA and SLT meetings parents share their opinions and vote on school issues and plans discussed. If a translator is needed, one is provided. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 50  2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janine Werner, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: World Journalism Preparatory School DBN: 25Q285 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Janine Werner Title Principal Nancy Poulos Assistant Principal Helen Reed Parent Coordinator Mary Bernhardt ENL/Bilingual Teacher Paula Freyeisen Parent Neal Reff/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Cecilia Patritti/Special Ed/EN Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Vincent Lumetta School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Doshka Truick Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Doshka Truick Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) o6/29/18 o6/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 54  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 55  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 56 
