2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q287 School Name: THE EMERSON SCHOOL Principal: JAKUB LAU 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Emerson School 342800010287 6-8 School Number (DBN): 28Q287 108-35 167 th St Jamaica, New York, 11433 (718) 657-4801 (718) 657-4807 Phone Number: Fax: Jakub Lau JLau@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Jakub Lau Marion James MonifaWalcott MalorieTibert TBD September 2018 n/a n/a Athen White District Information Geographical District: 28 Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd Queens. NY, 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 557-2618 Phone Number: 718-206-2748 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.642.5855 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Jakub Lau Marion James MonifaWalcott Susan Ally AthenWhite MalorieTibert Latina Lewis NeetaSidat Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative SLT Chairperson/Teacher Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Gabrielle Cummings-King Lisa Carlos ShellianBarnes Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Emerson School seeks to promote the ideals of self-reliance and intellectual curiosity by deepening scholars’ awareness of their environment and the forces that shape it. This work starts with our faculty meeting students where they are and supporting their individual needs. It proceeds to scholars being accountable for their learning. It culminates with opportunities for them to showcase what they know through how they speak and how they write. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 1. Students are provided with a curriculum that emphasizes experiential learning, character development and prepares them for future academic and professional endeavors. Our school consists of stakeholders who are active participants in creating an environment that promotes collaboration, high expectations and prepares our students to be independent thinkers and life-long learners. The school has partnered with the Hispanic Coalition for Family Services, which runs an Arts and Literacy After School Program and Entertainer 4 Excellence Alliance, which runs both day time and after school programs. The school also offers a CHAMPS program, and maintains partnerships with the Alpha Phi Alpha Intercollegiate Fraternity, 100suits academy, and the Beacon Program. Finally, we are also working to develop new programs in collaboration with the two other schools in our building, I.S. 8 and York Early College Academy (YECA). In 2018-2019, Emerson will be partnered with YECA as part of the Learning Partners Program 2. Over the last two years, the school has seen a significant increase in its special education and ENL student populations. The school’s primary strengths are the strong culture of high academic and behavioral expectations, modeled on the practices and procedures of the Uncommon Charter School Network. Last year, the school made significant gains in developing a unified curriculum and standards based assessment practice, having a significant percentage of students make a year’s growth on the NYS ELA and Math exams, and establishing clear systems for tracking student progress on standard mastery through the use of outside resources (iReady) and internally developed school wide assessments (Problems of the Week). Our challenges for this year is to ensure that student progress toward content standard mastery continues to be appropriately tracked using the resources we have collaboratively developed and implemented. We plan to continue working with the Assessment Matters program and leveraging our work with the Learning Partners Program to learn best practices for improving student outcomes on standards-based assessments. 3. This past year, our school made the most progress in further developing a unified viable curriculum that meets the needs of all students. The primary focus was maintaining the culture and expectations and continuing to establish high academic and behavioral expectations. Making sure these things become ever-more embedded as we focus on developing the curriculum and instruction to provide a rigorous Common Core aligned and experiential education for all of our scholars is one of our top priorities. We also expanded our Regents offerings, adding Integrated Algebra and U.S. History regents in addition to Living Environment which we began offering in 2015-2016. In 2018-2019, we are adjusting our 8th grade math curriculum to allow students preparing for the Integrated Algebra Regents to also receive the content necessary for demonstrating content understanding on the New York State 8th grade Mathematics test. 4. We have built successful partnerships with the following CBO organizations, which work collaboratively with the school to achieve the goals described in this CEP: I Will Graduate (IWG) 2018-19 CEP 10  IWG provides extra-curricular activities as well as mentoring programs to support the students and families. Families participate and volunteer throughout the duration on the program and their events. 100Suits Academy A gender based mentoring program that is designed to help families navigate through the world outside of the classroom. Both the Male and Female groups meet weekly and cover topics such as financial literacy Arts & Literacy Provides after school activities for our students, the after school activities consist of homework assistance, provides multiple sports specifically basketball, soccer, flag football. Participants also have the opportunity to join cooking classes, painting, and dance class. All programs feaur culminating performances. Parents are encouraged to participate in the planning and execution of the programming and activities. Arts & Literacy runs from Monday-Friday and some Saturdays. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As mentioned previously, our ENL population has increased significantly in the last two years. In order to support this population we have undertaken the following steps: 1. Purchasing support programs targeted for ENL studnents such as iLitELL. 2. Sending ENL Team to participate in FSC CALI Institute. 3. Incorporating Language Objectives into all lesson plans. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area where we have made the most improvement is creating Supportive Environment. The area where we need to focus for this school year is Rigorous Instruction. Our goals around more effectively using the internal (Problems of the Week) and external (iReady, MasteryConnect, iXL, etc.) student assessment tools will allow our teachers to tailor their instruction so that it is appropriately rigorous for our various student populations. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q287 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 365 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 35 15 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 37 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 80.0% % Reduced Lunch 12.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 7.1% 20.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 4% 29% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 28 90.8% 4.7% 25.8% 50.7% 19.7% 7.1% 2 33% 3.9 16.1% 14% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES NO N/A N/A YSH NO NO N/A YSH NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● 2018 State Exam data indicates that majority of students continue to be below proficiency level. Students have the ability to identify data but struggle to interpret and analyze it. The school's lowest achieving standards in both Math and ELA suggest students struggle with application and analysis of concepts (i.e. identifying themes in a text or explaining mathematical reasoning). ● Weekly content-team meetings in ELA and Math indicate that teachers need support in creating questions and discussions at a DOK level 3 or higher. ● Teacher feedback from in-house surveys and end of year conferences show that teacher desire support in areas surrounding developing students' analytical thinking. ● By moving from Questioning and Discussion to Student Engagement as our instructional focus in 2016-2017, Emerson built on the school’s CEP goal from 2015-2016 regarding Rigorous Instruction as necessary to ensure continued measurable growth in the efficacy of instruction. We are continuing with an instructional focus of Student Engagement in 2018-2019. Having built the systems that will allow us to track student progress as related to content standards, our teacher will now be able to craft more engaging lessons by having them be more tailored to student needs based on data collect from iReady diagnostics and standards based assessment practices documented in MasteryConnect. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all instructional lessons at The Emerson School will display clear evidence of student engagement as described in our school-wide definition of student engagement, #SELFIE. As a result, 80% of all teacher ratings for all observations, specifically in Danielson Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, will be rated as effective or highly effective, as measured by Advance. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). #SELFIE was created and implemented school-wide in February 2017 by members of the instructional cabinet to create a unified definition of what student engagement looks like for students. Every observation in ADVANCE will indicate in the component rationale for 3c: Engaging Students in Learning what element of #SELFIE was evident in the lesson. Weekly Common Planning agendas will outline the conversation about collected data and how that data will be used to inform instruction. In at least 5 of these meetings (following administration of benchmark assessments) each team will pick a instructional strategy designed to create standards based growth as measured in MasteryConnect (i.e. a Cycle of Inquiry). During each cycle, the team will select a future meeting where the impact of the selected instructional strategy will be discussed. These meetings will follow the norms outlined in the school’s CEP goal for Effective School Leadership (5d). Content teams meet weekly, vertically and horizontally, to discuss grade-specific issues (interventions, benchmark assessments, common misconceptions). Big ideas for each grade will be targeted along with specific strategies such as graphic organizers, small-group instruction, and other differentiated resources to target high-need students All teachers September 2018-June 2019 All teachers All teachers, with an emphasis on ELA and Math teachers September 2018-June 2019, weekly meetings, bi weekly administration of Problems of the Week ELA and Math leads. All teachers are responsible for implementing strategies All teachers September 2018-June 2019, weekly meetings All teachers with an emphasis on those teaching high-need students such as SWDs and ELLs Teachers will share curriculum and lesson-plan resources on ATLAS Rubicon. Teachers will build on common resources to differentiate for their students and target specific needs. All teachers All teachers September 2018-June 2019, ongoing Teachers will use Skedula and MasteryConnect to record information about the standards that they are using to plan their assignments and lessons. This information will be shared with parents via PupilPath and differentiated support will be provided to parents through both teachers , the parent coordinator, and administration. September 2018-June 2019, ongoing All teachers, parent coordinator, parents, and administration. All teachers will use Skedula, MasteryConnect 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator, in collaboration with relevant teachers, will schedule workshops that speak to how parents can support the work of teachers in instruction aligned to the Common Core. These workshops will happen periodically throughout the school year on a monthly basis. Teachers participate in the monthly PTA meetings, guiding parents through some the anticipate work and the foundation on the curriculum. Administration will oversee work of Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for common planning, Professional development and workshops around increasing student engagement, using assessment in instruction, strengthening questioning and discussion in the classroom to support assessment and engagement, and utilizing ATLAS Rubicon, Skedula, and MasteryConnect. Per session and per diem will be available as necessary to support in and out of building professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of all teachers and staff emphasizing the focus on student engagement, at least 75% of all teachers will receive at least 1 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson components 3c and 3d, as measured by Advance observation reports between September 2018 and February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Increase in student engagement will be assessed both by Advance rating in components 3c and 3d as well as an increase in student achievement on our common benchmark assessments in ELA, Social Studies, Math, and Science, two of which will have been administered by February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● The school's strengths in this area are its rating in the top 25% of city school in Supportive Environment on the NYC School Survey and the increase in suspension rates over the last three years as indicated in the OSYD portal. ● Student who are referred to the Response to Intervention team may require additional socio-emotional support. ● The Emerson School's vision emphasizes character building by investing students in “creating an environment that promotes collaboration.” ● Empirical data suggests that students who struggle in 9th grade often have challenges with the extra independence that requires better study habits and greater self-motivation. ● The small size of our school and the close connections that our students are able to make with teachers may not be as readily available to those students attending large high schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Emerson scholars will have monthly opportunities to engage in collaborative presentations and discussions about academic and behavioral expectations as well as current events impacting the community, resulting in all students having a forum to discuss matters of equity and empathy and ensuring all students feel well-known by at least one adult . This will be measured by all students receiving at least eight (8) “Emerson Bucks"/Skedula Merits for participating in advisory discussions. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Ten (10) monthly assemblies organized by Student Government and/or Administrative Cabinet and include skits and presentations aligned to the topics chosen by the student government and/or administration. (skits and presentations reviewed beforehand by Student Government Adviser). Advisory following monthly assemblies begins with debrief of assembly topics. All students will participate in a weekly small group advisory program that targets character building and socio-emotional development through activities centered around exploring personalities and issues in a non-academic setting. Students will be following the Restore360: Building Belonging Curriculum with adjustments to cover topics relevant to the students, as they arise in individual advisory classes. Emerson Bucks will be used as a positive incentive for students who exhibit extraordinary behaviors in the area of Respect, Integrity, Compassion, Honesty, Empowerment, and Responsibility (R.I.C.H.E.R). Students will have an opportunity to go to the Emerson Store once a week to purchase a prize with their Emerson dollars. Students who successfully participate in monthly debriefs will receive a a Skedula merit (i.e. an Emerson buck) for successful participation as determined by a participation checklist utilized by advisory teachers. Student accumulation of Emerson bucks will be tracked utilizing merit badges IO Education. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, School counselors, School deans, Student government advisers Advisory Teachers, School counselors All students Program Implementation: September 2018 to June 2019 All students September 2018 to June 2019, weekly WIN for 6th graders, weekly Advisory for one period for all students All students September 2018 All Teachers to June 2019 All students September 2018 All Teachers to June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Emerson's open door policy supports the understanding of Supportive Environment, in order to engage parents we host monthly meeting aligned with Framework For Greater Schools expectations. We encourage our families to 2018-19 CEP 17  reinforce the schools practices outlined in advisory and WIN at home to ensure the child and families knowledge and understanding of Emerson's culture of being a safe place to learn, and feel supported by of the staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development for staff on advisory, time, funding for school-wide campaigns and student test-preparation, support from Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility and Brain Power education. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a month by month increase in the amount of Emerson bucks distributes, as measured utilizing the Merits/Demerits function of the IO Education software suite. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IO Education allows for tracking of Emerson bucks (referred to as merits/demerits) for each individual student. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● 2018 State Exam data continues to indicate that students have the ability to identify data but struggle to interpret and analyze it in order to draw conclusions. The school's lowest achieving standards in both Math and ELA suggest students struggle with application and analysis of concepts (i.e. identifying themes in a text or explaining mathematical reasoning). ● Teacher observation data, as recorded in Advance, indicates a need for developing assessments that target argumentative writing and respond to student data. ● Students with a Level 1 score on State ELA exam will be prioritized to ensure monitoring of progress toward attaining grade-level content mastery. ● Content meeting discussion and end of year teacher conference discussions indicate a need for more shared data points that teachers can use to compare/contrast student achievement across a grade in a uniform manner. ● The school's Quality Review indicated that Indicator 2.2, Aligning Assessment to Curricula, was a area of improvement for the school. By agreeing on shared data points across the school and using these as the foundation for instructional and curricular adjustments, the school is ingraining the practice of using data to inform instruction into its foundational practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, across all grades students will demonstrate at least 50% mastery of the standards in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science as measured by a minimum of five standards-aligned common formative assessments in each of the above subjects. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each subject area team will develop a common formative assessment calendar to include a minimum of 5 common assessments per subject, per grade covering identified “focus standards.” All Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies leads. All teachers are responsible for implementing strategies. Emphasis will be placed on providing this support for new and struggling teachers. Departments will develop, review and/or revise common assessments via a collaborative process to ensure assessment timing, rigor, relevance and standards coverage. This will result in assessments collaboratively developed, administered, normed and scored in MasteryConnect by teacher teams. ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers In addition to common assessments, ELA and Math teachers will develop, schedule, administer and score 3 benchmark assessments (October, January, May) over the course of the year to track student growth in mastery of the standards. ELA and Math Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers ELA and Math Teachers Baseline Students Data: September - October 2018 Data Analysis and Curricular Revision: September 2018 to June 2019 All assessments will be uploaded to MasteryConnect and scored there to provide teacher teams with standards-aligned data displays for team meetings. September 2018 to June 2019 ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 Using benchmark and/or other common assessment data, teams will meet periodically to discuss instructional adjustments, to check in on student mastery progress and to discuss instructional adjustments meant to accelerate that progress. ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our teachers and our Parent Coordinator work closely together to ensure students are aware of their student's progress.. Parents are encouraged to attend monthly workshops which expose Collaborative Strategies and explain programs such as iReady which allow parents to track students' progress toward improving achievement on the benchmarks discussed in this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Effective use of common planning time, technology resources available to teachers, online software such as Atlas Rubicon, iReady, MasteryConnect, and MyOn that collects data on student strengths and weaknesses and can be used to triangulate student achievement with classroom assessment and city and stay assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored through analysis of 2nd benchmark data as documented on MasteryConnect. In addition, progress will be discussed individually with teachers during mid-year check-in conferences regarding their individual goals for the school year. Differentiated support will be provided to teachers not meeting these set benchmarks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress on the common benchmarks and formative assessments will be used to assess progress. The benchmarks and formative assessments will be assessed utilizing MasteryConnect to ensure standard alignment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the school grows and builds capacity, administration is striving to increase teachers’ leadership capacity and to establish in-house experts on various pedagogical tools and strategies. In 2015-2016, the Emerson met its CEP goal of having every staff member participating in at least one meeting of a professional learning team. The school was also successful in having multiple staff members lead professional learning on topics such as using time management and effective use of SMART board technology. Administration will continue to provide meaningful, actionable, and timely feedback for all teacher observations, and this feedback will continue to be based on the Danielson Framework, more teacher leadership is necessary as the school grows in its number of students and teachers. While the school has achieved positive feedback regarding leadership on the 2016-2017 survey, the survey suggests teachers want greater opportunities to have a voice in the professional development available to our Learning Community. We achieved our goal in 2016-2017 of having every teacher participate in differentiated PD. This year we are moving on to seeing the work of those professional developments applied by having every department member facilitating their respective common planning meetings to ensure universal buy in and understanding of our standards-based assessment and instructional expectations. This will help ensure we are addressing the data from the 2017-2018 survey which indicates not all teachers believe a clear vision for school improvement is being articulated by creating distributive leadership opportunities that allow teachers a voice in crafting the vision for school improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, every ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies teacher will facilitate at least four of the grade common planning meetings that occur on a weekly basis. This will be measured by weekly meeting agendas indicating each meeting facilitator stored on the school’s Google Drive and will result in 25% of teachers increasing one performance level in Danielson Component 4e: Growing and developing professionally. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Rotation of responsibilities (facilitator, timekeeper, and recorder) during common planning (with set agendas, recorded in the school's Google Drive) All teachers Administration will keep individual teachers accountable by reviewing meeting agendas and notes, all of which will be shared on the school's Google Drive. All teachers Administration, in coordination with the Math and ELA data leads, will be responsible for developing the Professional Development calendar by October 2018, which will indicate . Throughout the year, this team will work on identifying issues in maintaining the expectation for cycles of inquiry (as discussed in the Action Plan for our Rigorous Instruction Goal, 5a) based on team discussions of student outcomes and instructional strategies to improve those outcomes. All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 All teachers Administration Instructional Cabinet/Professional Development Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Emerson school has built a strong community based support team, which includes a variety of CBO's and our families, together we work towards effective school leadership. All parents are invited to our monthly SLT meetings, dates and times are posted on bulletins boards. School-wide reminder messages are sent electronically through PupilPath and Blackboard connects. Through these methods, supervised by our Parent Coordinator, the impact on instruction of the professional development attended and facilitated by our teachers, will be shared with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Appropriate scheduling to allow all staff common planning time during the day, appropriate funding allocation to allow teachers or teams to attend professional development on topics aligned to instructional strategies they plan to implement to address student outcomes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all teacher should facilitate at least 2 common planning meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agenda indicating topics for each common planning meeting, and the name of each meeting facilitator will be stored on the school's Google Drive. These agendas will be reviewed by administration and utilized in evaluating Danielson Component 4e. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● PTA turnout for the first two meetings of the year has been strong, with an approximately 50% increase in attendance compared to 2017-2018. ● As we enter our fifth year as a fully grown school, our community highly values parent involvement and wants to plan both school and PTA events in a strategic manner that maximized attendance. ● The school has hosted a variety of events throughout the school year, building a unique and collaborative school culture is one of the school’s strengths. ● The school is focused on increasing parent attendance at these events, especially among our academically at risk students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an 10% increase in parents stating they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event resulting in greater attendance at school events and greater collaboration between parents and school staff. This will be measured by at least 86% of parents responding that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event, as measured by the NYC School Survey Report. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent outreach via surveys and the PTA executive board regarding what events, activities, and support services parents want to see offered by the school. Collaboration with CBO partners, Arts and Literacy (Coalition for Hispanic Family Services), I Will Graduate, and 100 Suits Academy, to identify and execute events and activities requested by parents and the school community. All Parents All Parents Parents are invited and encouraged to attend already established school-wide community-building events such as an International Festival, Career Day, and Spring barbeque. All Parents Three of these four events will include a joint school/PTA curriculum night, an award ceremony celebrating students and parents, and a pot-luck dinner event. All Parents PTA Executive Board September - October 2018 September 2018-June 2019 Emerson Administration and CBO September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All school personnel, especially parent coordinator and administrators All school personnel, especially parent coordinator and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. I Will Graduate (IWG) 100Suits Academy Arts and Literacy (Coalition for Hispanic Family Services) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Allocate funds for food, supplies, and decorations for joint events. Allocate personnel to plan and advertise said events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 26  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will hold at least one combined PTA and School event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Since the NYC School Survey Report will be unavailable at this time, interim progress will be measured by PTA and School Event attendance as measured by sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State test scores, mid-year assessments, rate of growth from previous year, and teacher reports. State test scores, mid-year assessments, rate of growth from previous year, and teacher reports. State test scores, mid-year assessments, rate of growth from previous year, and teacher reports. State test scores, mid-year assessments, rate of growth from previous year, and teacher reports. Response to Intervention Team determines students that are at risk and require at-risk services. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) School-wide close reading strategies, vocabulary strategies, repeated readings and annotations Graphic organizers, close reading strategies for word problems. Graphic organizers, close reading and annotation strategies, and vocabulary strategies School-wide close reading strategies, vocabulary strategies, repeated readings and annotations Counseling, Saturday programs, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one and small group One-to-one and small group One-to-one and small group One-to-one and small group One-to-one and small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before school, and after school with support from CBO partner During the school day, before school, and after school with support from CBO partner During the school day, before school, and after school with support from CBO partner During the school day, before school, and after school with support from CBO partner During the school day, before school, and after school with support from CBO partner 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Our STH population at the end of the 2016-2017 school year was 45 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The Emerson School provides STH students with additional support in the form of school supplies (bookbags, pens/pencils, notebooks, etc.). We also provide STH students with uniform apparel so that these students can comply with our school-wide uniform policy. Like all Emerson students, these students also have access to before and after school academic interventions based on need. This coming school year, we are planning on expanding our services for these students by subsidizing their participation in school trips and 8th grade "senior" activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited and retained in a variety of ways, including but not limited to: 1. Hiring fairs, resumes sent to the school, and recommendations: 2. Networking with principals in the district, network, and via professional organizations. 3. Partnerships with New York City Teaching Fellows and Teach for America. All teachers new to the NYC DOE receive mentoring from tenured teachers that is documented via the Mentor Tracking System (MTS). Teacher recruitment is founded on the goal of finding highly effective, highly qualified teachers. Teachers are recruited in a variety of ways, including but not limited to hiring fairs, resumes sent to the school, and recommendations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development opportunities to develop assessment in instruction are provided in-house via content team meetings, grade meetings, new teacher committee meetings, and professional development committee meetings. Additional opportunities are provided by the Borough Field Support Center, Uncommon Schools, Educators for Student Success, Middle School Professional Learning Community (PLC), and the district. The school has split up its professional development differentiated activities for every Monday of the month (Faculty Meetings, Grade Meetings, Data Meetings, and Differentiated PD). Further out of building professional development is identified for individual teachers and groups of teacher based on classroom observation and administrative review of student work products. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 31  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the beginning of the year, all assessment option were discussed and agreed upon by the MOSL committee. Content specific assessments are discussed and agreed upon at content team meetings. Professional development on the use of assessment data are provided by the administrative team and network support staff via in house and out of building PD opportunities. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 32 school allocation amounts) Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) x x 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 163,102.00 0 0 0 2,433,649.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 33  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Emerson School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Emerson School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Emerson School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 37  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In the Emerson School, Title III program will continue providing during upcoming school year English Language Learners with supplemental instruction after school. Our data from our the last years' NYSELAT, the Beginning of the Year Iready diagnostic, and various other targeted assessments reveal that many of our students struggle with reading comprehension skills , vocabulary, writing, grammar and phonics. Therefore, this program is designed to enhance our 6, 7, and 8 grade ELL students’ of all levels (including former ELL students), reading comprehension skills, vocabulary development, grammar, phonics and also math skills. The intent is also to improve their literacy abilities and language development in the four modalities of the English language. In the Title III program two ENL teachers and two content area teachers: ELA and Math teachers will work in collaboration to provide successful assistance and direct instruction. The teachers will collaborate to assist students with different programs, co-teach and then will work with small groups in order to target specific areas of instruction according to the level and focus of the students and based on the classroom observations and assessments from those programs. This model will support small group instruction in conjunction with whole group instruction. We will also have an option for students and parents to choose. The After School Title III Program last school year 2017-2018 was offered on Wednesdays, Thursdays from 3:10 am - 5:30. The next school year we will offer this program again to our ELL parents. This class will continue throughout the school year. Parent phone calls will continue to be made, notes will be sent via Skedula and parent notes will be translated and translated messages will be made through School messenger. Attendance will be taken daily and kept in a binder, along with lesson plans. Student portfolios will be kept with student assessments and work. Delivery of instruction will be in English only with ENL supports, however non-English speakers will be additionally supported by Bilingual staff. Technology resources available to teachers, online software such as iReady, iXL, and MyOn that provides instructional support and collects data on student strengths and weaknesses will continue to be used in the Emerson School to triangulate student achievement with classroom assessment and city and state assessments. This year we used also ELL ILit, a comprehensive reading intervention program and effectively used it with our ELL students . The Emerson school is already successfully using the i-Ready Diagnostic program to provide a deep, customized evaluation of every student and to track student growth and performance. It identifies why students are struggling, measures growth across a student’s career and supports data-driven differentiated instruction.MyOn, the reading program is also successfully used in our school. It maximizes reading growth and generates individualized, interest-based recommendations within all learners’ target Lexile ranges to engage them with just-right texts. It deepens vocabulary and provides them a power of choice where learners select books from the entire library or read from book sets created by their teachers to support instructional goals. Therefore, we will continue using those programs for our Title III program for our ELL students in addition to the other online learning programs and software which we are planning to purchase for upcoming school year. All these programs will be delivered to students in English with support in native language as needed. This support will provide students with the strategies and skills that are needed to meet Common Core ELA/MATH standards and will help to focus 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information on ENL/ESL standards that are aligned with Common Core Standards. Each student will be provided with IPads, and Laptops to support our student’s language acquisition and content specific skills. The students will also continue using different language learning apps in the Title III program. Those programs we will be utilizing the Finish Line New York ELLs, and Brain Pop, Flocabulary, picture dictionaries , bilingual dictionaries and other resources. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to provide successful instruction to the students, the ENL teachers and content area teachers will receive professional development in the effective use of ENL approaches. This funding source will be also used to provide substitute coverage to enable the teachers to attend professional development workshops and to will be specifically targeted to our TITLE III programs. Teachers and all personnel at the school also will meet monthly to discuss English Language Learners’ academic progress, data and successful strategies for ELLs. During Monday Pds all the teachers including ELL teachers were successfully provided by school staff and outside providers many PDs. Our ENL teacher attended various ELL workshops and Pds organized by CEI Professional Development services: 5 sessions from ELL Instructional Leadership Leadership Institute (EILI), 2 sessions from Academic language as lever in the next generation ELA standards, 2 Sessions from Mini Language Development Institue (MLDI), Nuts and Bolts of ELL related items, Writing the titile III LEP plan, NYSESLAT scoring Training Scoring Session and others. We will continue working closely with Queens South ELL Team from Borough Field Support Center and their representatives, Academic Policy and Systems Lead from Division of English Language Learners and Student Support and Marie-Antoinette Rousseau , Senior ELL compliance and Performance Specialist Division of English Language Learners and Students Support. We will continue with these trainings this year. The ENL teachers and other staff members working with ELL students will turn key in the afternoon, Saturday program, or during the Monday Pd from 8 am to 8.50 pm. on the topic agreed on by the teachers working with ELL students. We are in the process of exploring different ideas and topics, therefore the topic of the PD will be finalized once the program is running. The topic will impact all the teachers in many ways. They will familiarize themselves with differentiation and scaffolding techniques for ELLs which will be helpful for them in classroom instruction and will expand their knowledge as the teachers of ELLs. ELA and Math content-area teams including ELL teachers will continue meeting next year to discuss the creation and implementation of higher-order questions and discussion topics, and engagement in the classrooms and other important topics beneficial for the instruction and planning. Big ideas for each grade will be targeted along with specific strategies such as graphic organizers, small-group instruction, and other differentiated resources to target high-need students including ELL students. Teachers will continue sharing curriculum and lesson-plan resources on ATLAS Rubicon with ELL teachers. Teachers will build on common resources to differentiate for their students and target specific needs of all students including ELL students. All the teachers together with ELL teachers will also continue to use Atlas Rubicon to record information about the standards that they are using to plan their assignments and lessons. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Professional development opportunities to develop assessment in instruction will be provided in-house via content team meetings, grade meetings, new teacher committee meetings, and professional development committee meetings. Further out of building professional development for all the teachers serving ELL students will be identified for individual teachers and groups of teacher based on classroom observation and administrative review of student work products. In addition, our ENL teachers will be part of any upcoming professional development that the Cluster and Central holds. Furthermore, a variety of workshops given by the Queens South Field Support Center throughout the year will provide our Title III Program teachers with knowledge on the needs of English Language Learners and implications for instruction. The ENL teachers of our school will receive dates, locations and topics of applicable workshops given by the QSFSC. Support specialist from district 28 will be providing continued support and professional development for ENL teachers during 2018-2019 school year. All agendas for Professional Development in the building and out of the building will be kept in a binder in the Assistant Principal's Office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Emerson School, in compliance with the Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school will host evens targeted toward parents of ELLs that will influence higher achievement for ELLs and help parents support their students. They will be provided with workshops on the below topics : Homework Help, Preparing their child for city and state assessments, Community based programs available for their children, computer programs, software and online resources we are implementing for our ELL students. The workshop schedule for parents and duration are following: every month afternoon 11:15 am. -1:00 pm, and evening between 5:30 pm and 7 pm for duration of 1,5 hours. We would like ELL parent to be more involved in Parents workshop, therefore we will take certain steps in this matter. The Emerson School will also conduct other parent workshops throughout the year to address specific parent needs and questions as they arise. Parent Association Meetings will continue to provide opportunities for parents/guardians of our ELLs to receive materials in regard to LEP programs and instruction across all content areas. Notification to ELL parents/guardians will be provided through phone blast, letters home and help from Translation and Interpretation Unit. The Emerson school is respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. It is providing information related to school and ELL parent programs, meetings and other activities, which are sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand. Our bilingual teachers and ENL teachers are always ready to provide assistance as needed. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name The Emerson School Borough Queens School Number 287 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jakub Lau Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Olga Tyminska Teacher/Subject Area Ludnie Desire/Math Teacher/Subject Area Rasheed Bility/SETTS Related-Service Provider Dominguez Maria/Speech Superintendent Assistant Principal Latina Lewis Coach School Counselor Kristen Volonakis-Rowland Parent Shuna Saul Morian Parent Coordinator Childs Darneil Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 379 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.08% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The instructional planning for ELLs at the Emerson School is guided by formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments. The Emerson School uses a variety of formative assessment tools to help assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These include myON, iReady, ILITELL, and diagnostic tests including formal and informal assessments which are given throughout the year. There are teacher created assessments and many informal classroom practices such as observational checklists, journals, peer assessments, self-checklists, graphic organizers, academic conversations to explain new learning, exit slips etc. The data compiled from these assessments help measure students’ growth and weaknesses in both in learning content or skills and in developing the English language and allow the teachers to keep a continual eye on the progress of the students. By using the data, in conjunction with data from other assessments such as the state ELA, math and science exams, MOSL exams and class benchmarks, teachers can create an appropriate individualized action plan for future instruction of the 2018-19 CEP 48  student. MOSL data, for example, indicates that students have the ability to identify data, but struggle to interpret and analyze it in order to draw conclusions. Data from those assessment tools indicates that our ELLs students are making steady gains in their academic progress and language acquisition. Each assessment tool provides teachers a baseline to drive instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At the Emerson School all teachers meet for common planning and professional development (PD) in and out of the building and plan for all the students, including ELL students. Teachers also participated in many workshops in which they learn about the formative assessments and the curriculum -embedded assessments that help them to use data as a formative tool. Additionally, they learn new instructional strategies that are used with ELL students, but also with the whole student population. Teachers work collaboratively to establish reasonable goals and expectations for our schools’ instructional plan at each grade level. Progress monitoring allows teachers to track growth for each individual student. The data allows the school to reflect on current and past practices and tailor instructional plan for the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? On the classroom level, the formative assessments are often flexible and administered on an ongoing basis. They are used as a feedback for both the students and the teacher. They serve as a goal setting opportunity and guidance for the students as well as provide information for the teacher on how to group the students during the center time and offer suggestions for addressing the students’ gaps in learning. At the Emerson School all teachers attend team meetings to analyze assessment data and plan for all students. Summative assessments provide teachers with data on individual needs and on how guide instruction. Teachers in ELA and Math employ Problems of the Week, which are uniformly administered to all students on a grade level. This information is then collected by our respective Math and ELA data leads. The implications of this data on instruction is then discussed at regular data meetings. The data generated from all those assessments allow us to prioritize students, classrooms, and grades that require professional development, resources or additional personnel to assist in meetings needs of the students. The success of the ENL program in the Emerson school is evaluated by monitoring progress on summative assessments such as the state ELA and math exams, science, NYSESLAT exam meeting AYP as well as report card grades, midterm exams and final projects. Therefore, the state tests are also the primary factor in our school's measure of AYP for our ELLs. Every year the NYSESLAT provides an insight about our students making gains and moving up from one proficiency level to another. Scores on the NYSESLAT exams are used and we evaluate the movement of students' results from one proficiency level to other and across the language modalities. The following Baseline/Benchmark assessments are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need: ELL Periodic assessment, MOSL assessments in ELA, MATH, Science, Social Studies, and state exams. ENL teachers of ELLs administer the ELL Periodic Assessment two times per year in fall and in the spring. This assessment measures student knowledge of common core standards that will be assessed on the NYSESLAT in the spring. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered the following structures are taking place. After taking NYSESLAT our ELLs are placed in appropriate groups according to their language proficiency level. Development of schedule ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency levels in our ENL classes by two ENL certified teachers. The integrated ENL and standalone ENL are dependent also upon the student’s proficiency level. ELLs who are also students with disabilities receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and SWDs according to their IEPs. NYSESLAT eligibility for students entering school with IEP’s is based in our school on the determination on the Language Proficiency Team (LPT). All students, including ELLs are only evaluated for special education when they do not respond to effective and rigorous instruction or additional intervention provided by the teachers. We also provide English language support to our former ELLs who exit out of ELL statues. ENL teachers sent home letters notifying the parents of their child’s eligibility to be in ELL program. A parent orientation is scheduled within ten days from the first day of school for new ELL students. Our school also identifies new ELLs as Students with interrupted /Inconsistent formal education (SIFE) as an additional part of the interview during the identification process within 30 days of enrollment. Our 2018-19 CEP 49  school is held responsible for making adequate Annual Yearly Progress to make sure that all ELLs meet the states ‘proficient level of achievement on the state academic assessment , NYSESLAT. The data gathered from the summative assessment is carefully analyzed by all the teachers and administrators and guides them with future instructional planning, accommodations and interventions for our ELLs. Our schools provides variety of interventions including speech, OT, SETTS, AIS. After school and Saturday programs are also offered to all the ELLs and support them with their language development in all the content areas. Those assessments measure student knowledge of common core standards and allow us to prioritize students, classrooms, and grades that require professional development, resources or additional personnel to assist in meetings needs of the ELL students. All the teachers and administrators collaborate to address all the interventions for the ELLs after analyzing the summative data. All parents of ELLs are informed of the interventions in their native language. Language Translation and Interpretation Unit is involved if necessary.They enable us to make thoughtful decisions about which student groups to target, how to prioritize and plan future instruction, and inform what resources, interventions or accommodations we should use to meet our students’ needs. Members of the school community also attend professional developments during PD Mondays as well as outside of the building to grow professionally, improve the quality of classroom instruction and put to work some research-validated strategies 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL teachers , all the content areas teachers and administrators analyze and evaluate the data from ELL students formative and summative assessment. Both summative and formative assessments are used not only to measure students knowledge of common core standards, but also to monitor students’ progress and the areas of weakness. Monitoring ELL students’ progress informs us how all the students including at-risk students are responding to instruction. This data is used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services or other services available in our school. Each of the assessment tool provides teachers and administrators a baseline to drive instruction and is used to plan lessons and units for our ELLs. ENL teachers schedule ELLs based on the spring NYSESLAT results using RLAT report from ATS and other available data (NYSITEL for newly identified ELLs) using the ELL Data Analysis Tool. According to the assessment data of last year NYSESLAT results most of our ELLs are classed as expanding after taking the NYSESLAT, and 4 of them are former ELL students. The data patterns reveals that the most ELL students are in expanding level of English proficiency across the grade 6 and grade 7. The least number of ELL students are in transition level ; one student is in grade 6 and one in grade 7. The most students in emerging level are in grade 7 (3), then in grade 8 ( 1 student) and in the grade 6 (1 student) . In the grade 8 we have most of our beginner ELLs - 5 entering level students and four emerging level students. The most students in commanding level are in grade 6 (4 students) and than in the grade 8 ( 1 student). The data from the assessments also shows that most of the ELL students need support in writing and reading skills and they need to develop their vocabulary in the all the content areas. At the Emerson School, we use the ELL data analysis tool EDAT, which allows us to download 3 ATS reports and then provides us with a summary of our ELL students' achievement and progress. EDAT ( formerly known as the AMAO Tool) helps us to target instructional programs and/or interventions to accelerate the achievement among both ELLs and non-ELLs. We use RESI data, RLAT data , RNMR data from ATS. The Emerson School uses EDAT to self evaluate , review and implement our plans and goals to strengthen our ENL program and to improve academic outcomes for our ELLs. The factors that are analyzed include home language, attendance, age, holdover status, and disability classification. Our school is held responsible for making adequate Annual Yearly Progress to make sure that all ELL meet the states' commanding level of achievement on the state academic assessment. 2018-19 CEP 50  Our ELLs are part of the entire school system; apart from being in the ENL program, they receive a content area instruction in the general classroom where the high-expectations are set. The students go through the proper identification process and formative and summative assessment to provide for individual needs and to guide instruction. The school keeps the complete data for each student in order to calculate growth in language proficiency from year to year. Our ELLs tend to perform better in listening and speaking modalities of the NYSESLAT, however they struggle most in the reading and writing modalities. We have made instructional shifts based on this data analysis. Our push-in/pull-out ENL teachers focus mostly on this area to expose, encourage, and challenge our ELLs to read and write based on the text and picture analysis. The progress of all ELLs and the former ELLs is being monitored and our school uses information on EDAT in order to provide additional help and support if necessary. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? To disseminate these findings in order to adjust our program we are sharing these assessment data analyses with the administrators and teachers and our ENL supervisors. Any assessment data are disseminated in order to make adjustment to our programs. Ongoing cooperative conversations are taking place during the Pds, meetings and common planning times. The ENL teachers provide documents and reports (RLAT) to make sure that ENL data and language proficiency levels are known to classroom teachers of ELLS. There are ongoing productive conversations and lesson planning opportunities during which the ELL teachers discuss the findings and propose adjustments to the program and instruction. Also, during parents’ meetings and parent-teacher conferences, parents and guardians of ELLs are being informed about their child’s progress and any new data findings. Our ENL teachers organize PDs to inform the teachers about ENL program and the ENL data. Parents are informed as well during the parents’ meetings about individual students’ progress according to these data analyses. Also the LAP team disseminates these findings, shares them and discusses proposed adjustments to our ENL program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Emerson School integrated and standalone ENL instruction is implemented as per CR Part 154.2. Our freestanding ENL program provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition and integrated ENL instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by certified ENL teachers who are often co-teaching with a certified content area teacher. ENL teachers instruction includes content area subject matter and English development using ENL strategies. The ELL students are spread between many classes in grades 6-8. The ENL teachers pushes in the classes during content instruction, or pulls out the ELL students into a separated location (standalone ENL). The ENL teachers collaborate with the content teachers, so that maximum differentiation is provided that enhances student understanding of English while learning classroom content. The integrated ENL along with the subject taught are dependent upon the student’s proficiency level. At the entering, emerging and transitioning levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided. At the expanding level, the integrated ENL is with any content area that best meets the needs of the student. Those ELLs who have a common home language organize collaborative tasks in the home language among peers; therefore, instruction is provided in English with native language support. Those tasks are enriched with Academic English Development. ELLs who are also students with disabilities receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and SWDs according to their IEPs. We 2018-19 CEP 51  also provide English language support to our former ELLs who exit out of ELL statues. Although the schedule varies each day, each day involves an integrated and standalone ENL instruction and with groups that are grade level homogeneous and language level heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels in our ENL classes by certified ESOL teachers during stand-alone ENL instruction and by integrated ENL teachers where 2 individually certified teachers are co-teaching. The schedule of our ELL students is provided to our principal who approves it. The ENL teacher is also responsible for scheduling ENL classes so that all ELL students receive the mandated instructional minutes. The integrated ENL and standalone ENL are dependent upon the student’s proficiency level. At the entering level (beginning level), ENL teacher provides 2 units of study per week (360 min). Stand-alone ENL is provided during 1 unit of study in ENL (180 min.) and integrated ENL is provided during 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) Emerging level (low intermediate) is provided during 2 units of study per week (360 min.) During this instruction stand – alone ENL is provided during 0.5 unit of study in ENL (90 min.) and integrated ENL is provided during 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) At this level there is also flexibility where 0.5 unit of study can be stand alone ENL or Integrated ENL/content area. (90 min). Transitioning level (intermediate level) is provided during 1 unit of study per week (180 min). During this instruction integrated ENL is provided for 0.5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 min). At this level, there is also flexibility where 0.5 unit of study can be stand alone ENL or integrated ENL/content area (90min). Expanding level (advanced level) is provided during 1 unit of study per week (180 min). During this instruction integrated ENL is provided during 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or content area (180 min). Commanding level (proficient) is provided for former ELLs who continue receive services for an additional two years. During this time 0.5 unit of study per week (90min.) can be provided of integrated ENL in ELA or content area, or other approved services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content area instruction is delivered in English during freestanding English as a new language (ENL) program. We provide stand alone ENL instruction and integrated ENL instruction. During the stand-alone instruction English language skills are developed, so that students can succeed in core content areas. During our integrated ENL instruction English language skills are built through content area instruction. Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. Our ENL program enhances student understanding of English while learning classroom content. Our ENL instruction provides instruction with home language support. In order to maximize English language acquisition for our ELLs and to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning standards, the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher work closely together to deliver literacy instruction as well as tailor additional content instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. Additionally, the ENL teachers instruct students using lower-level text on content area subjects as a means of support. Other supports provided are the use of English and Native Language dictionaries and books, audio books, and Native Language speakers for instruction. Our school has purchased programs that will enhance content area learning acquisition of the ELL population. The first program is the Great Source Access ESL Newcomer Program to be used with ELLs new to the NYC system. The school has also purchased NYC Core Curriculum; ELA Classroom Library Native Language Collection; language: Bengali/English. This will help raise the reading level of our Bengali speaking students. To help students to progress in these programs we utilize the following practices: Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery, such as Modeling, Bridging, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and 2018-19 CEP 52  Metacognition. We also utilize collaborative planning between ENL, ELA, Math teachers and other content areas teachers for each unit to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally, we continue to strongly target language development across the grades and content areas, creating opportunities for active meaningful engagement. In all content areas the teachers are concerned with the language needs of ELLs and together with ENL teacher modifies their instructional language and scaffold the instruction in order to ensure students understanding. Differentiation strategies during the ENL instruction include research and focused discussion of key content vocabulary terms; use of graphic organizers to support text analysis; guided and shared reading to support text comprehension; teacher modification of key texts to differentiate for individual students' levels; use of pre-writing graphic organizers to support text development and organization; and regular, individual conferences to review students' strengths, needs and goals. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ENL instruction enhances ELL’s existing home language skills. This allows students to access content by interacting with each other at varying levels of language proficiencies. Therefore, our ENL teachers and the classroom teachers organize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the home language among peers. Those tasks are enriched with academic English language development. Our home language resources available in the classroom and in the school’s library are used to accelerate ELLs learning. The ENL teachers also make sure that each core content teacher is equipped with the necessary assessments in every ELL’s native language. These assessments are a combination of teacher made tests and past state exams. This allows those students who intend to take their state assessment in their native language to have the opportunity to practice dealing with both the format and content of the test. We believe that the more literate students are in the home language the stronger and more expedient is their transition to academic English proficiency. We have many paras who speak different languages and who assist us with their translations and work throughout the year with ENL teachers and the classroom teachers. We also use over the phone translation unit if it is necessary. In regards to language, all ENL students are provided with the testing accommodations such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, the use of English and alternate language editions of the test or the oral test translation in a case where there is no translated edition provided by the Department. All translations are oral, direct translations of the English editions. ELL making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations may write their responses to the open-ended questions in their native language. ELL students may also use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. Native language dictionaries, picture dictionaries in different languages and native language books are often used in the ENL classroom and the content area classes. Report cards and any other information on the student are given to students and parents in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL population consists of many subgroups, and they all require differentiated instruction. a) SIFE students are evaluated in their native language to assess deficiencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking to better determine areas in need of greater support. Once the ENL teachers have assessed areas of weakness, they will then work closely with the student's content teachers to create strategies that specifically help the student in the identified areas. Once an action plan has been created, it will be implemented by the student's teachers, as well as the ENL teachers with regular reviewing occurring during ongoing inquiry meetings. Additionally, we provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program on both push in and pull out services, make an individualized student needs assessment, differentiate of instruction in all areas, provide with the grade appropriate instructional support materials and communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. The Emerson School is monitoring the progress of those students and their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math assessments and other assessments and provides support in all content areas to differentiate instruction. 2018-19 CEP 53  b) Newcomers are provided with a risk free, welcoming environment to meet the transitional needs of these newly arrived immigrants. These students are encouraged to become involved in learning their new language through role-plays, simulations, projects, field trips and scaffold lessons. It is important to provide informal assessments in order to know students' prior knowledge and build on the skills they already have in order for them to acquire new skills. Native language support is provided, through home language print, technologies, translations in the native language and encouraging "buddy systems" of students who speak a same home language. When a new student is registered in our school, it is crucial to find out if they are literate in their native language in order to provide materials that will support them academically (i.e., books, glossaries, dictionaries). Students and teachers work together improving listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Focus is given to phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, decoding, encoding, as well as reading comprehension. The newcomers are provided with a variety of strategies and materials are used to aid their instruction: scaffolding, picture dictionaries, photo cards, realia, manipulative. They are provided with the support that prepares them to participate in NYS assessments (e.g. ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). In addition, word to word dictionaries and glossaries are in place to support them during the tests as well as translated tests editions may be available for students who have to take state exams (i.e., ELA, Math, etc.). They are taught explicit test taking skills and are encouraged to enroll in the school’s After School Program and to participate in school celebrations and other programs for further support. In order to provide ELLs native language support, state exams maybe administered in the student’s native language or when unavailable, translators are hired to support students. Newcomers receive explicit differentiated instruction that addresses their transitional needs and academic needs, as well as language development strategies. Listening comprehension is mainly targeted with newcomers, with software and web based programs. Teachers work with newcomers in a rigorous language development program in order to prepare them to take the required ELA test after one year. An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs and home school communication is an important factor for our newcomers. c) For developing ELLs assessment data is carefully analyzed to determine areas of weakness and instruction is planned to address those weaknesses. Teachers regularly read assessment data to monitor the student’s progress in all content areas and better differentiate instruction for specific academic needs and still providing native language support. The skills that prove to be more difficult are targeted in small group settings. The school administers the periodic exams to all students to specifically pinpoint the exact areas in which the student is struggling. This allows the teachers to expand on the information offered in the NYSESLAT. The focus will before teachers to target vocabulary development, and introduce students to new authors and genres to improve reading skills; via the use of graphic organizers, modeling, chants, songs, rubrics and a print rich environment. Instruction for those students will focus on activities that are designed to develop higher level of language use in the content areas, expanding vocabulary, explicating teaching reading comprehension strategies, scaffolding academic language, modeling a think aloud verbalizing a confusing point. The writing process is broken down into stages. This process always starts with brainstorming activities that are visually displayed via graphic organizers. Grammar, spelling and punctuation rules are taught, as well as, the format for writing essays, reports, poetry and letters. d) The differentiated instruction for students who completed 6 years of ENL services (Long Term Students) is especially focused on immersing them in a print-filled environment, providing context-enriching activities, engaging students in small group activities, providing multiple opportunities for students to learn. Native language support is also provided as needed. In addition to the support received in ENL classes, those students are required to participate in Extended Day program and Small Group Instruction. They are provided with the support that prepares them to participate in NYS assessments (e.g. ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). Students work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need. In addition, word to word dictionaries and glossaries are in place to support them during the tests. Our action plan for this group involves also monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs, encourage their participation in the school’s programs to enrich their language and academic skills and to communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. e) Former ELLs according to a new CP Part 154 still receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL for 2 years after testing out as per NYSESLAT or other ELL exit criteria. Students who are former ELLs and have completed six years are integrated into our 2018-19 CEP 54  standard educational models. They are illegible not only for transition support, but also for two years after testing accommodations that also apply for other ELLs and they can receive additional support as needed. Testing accommodations for LEP/ELLs students on NYS ELA and content - area assessments include: time extension, separate location, third reading of listening section (ELA exams only), bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries, oral translation of low incidence languages. After reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, or testing advanced on the NYSESLAT and test at level 3 or 4 on the ELA, or tested advanced on the NYSESLAT and test 65 or higher on the English Regents former ELL students will continue to receive language acquisition support to consolidate and further develop their English language skills in different content areas enriched with academic English language development and focused on reading and writing skills. The ENL teachers will work closely with the content teachers to create an action plan that will help address any areas where the former ELL might still need assistance. They will monitor the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs and will design many collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions among students. Students will work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need .The ENL teachers will also ensure that all teachers are aware of the testing accommodations to which former ELLs are still entitled. Former ELLs will also be encouraged to sign up for all extracurricular programs open to ELLs. As a policy for special needs students we ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. The Emerson School students with special needs are integrated in the mainstream ENL program and put under the supervision of the teacher and school Health Coordinator. Based on the individual, ENL strategies and instructional methods are utilized. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL and content teachers all have access to the students' IEPs on the SESIS system. For ELL students with special needs, the IEP is used to guide accommodations in both instruction and testing. The teachers make note of the specific accommodations needed for each individual student. There is also ongoing communication between the teachers and related services personnel. They both meet as a means of exchanging strategies and sharing assessment data to help the students perform on a differentiated grade level. English language development is accelerated through differentiated activities specifically designed to target language acquisition. ENL program combines precisely leveled, print-based learning and teaching resources combined with engaging and motivating interactive multimedia technology that supports language and literacy proficiency for ELLs-SWDs. It also provides an ELL component that supports the class curriculum and provides ELLs-SWDs with scaffolding. To both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development teacher of ELL-SWDs and content area teacher who work together use small group instruction, many scaffolding techniques, rich print environment, word walls, content areas glossaries in different languages and leveled books. Teachers use differentiated instruction and utilize visuals, games and hands-on activities to ensure the students’ understanding of content area subjects while acquiring English. Every day there is small class instruction and writing activities. ELL-SWDs also use technology support with the computers, laptops and online resources. Furthermore, Teachers of ELL-SWDs use grade level books, which also have the ENL component to differentiate the instruction. Professional development meetings with classroom teachers, special education teachers, other SWDs providers and ENL teachers are also very helpful tool of communication and resource for planning the instruction. ENL materials for ELL-SWDs students are grade level and age appropriate with cognitively challenging content that is aligned with state standards. They are appropriate for the diverse levels of English language proficiency. ENL teachers are using thematic instruction, so the students are exposure to common vocabulary and related common area content. The themes are aligned with the New York State Learning Standards, Common Core Standards and the English language proficiency standards. Grade level materials help ENL teachers to develop appropriate task for different proficiency levels. ELL students are using hands ‐ on/visual resources and simplified texts to learn the grade level content. 2018-19 CEP 55  The materials are also age appropriate, engaging all proficiency levels ELL-SWDs and supported with the ENL classroom leveled library , picture dictionaries, picture books, maps and other quality visual resources which provides the background and the vocabulary needed to read a more complex text, so the students can learn content being taught in the general education classes. Native language materials are used during an ENL instruction with ELL-SWDs including bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries, bilingual books and other materials in the native languages represented by ELLs. The Emerson School makes sure that the child’s IEP is being carried out as it was written and makes sure that ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs. The child’s IEP is reviewed by the IEP team at least once a year, or more often for a purpose of reviewing if the child is achieving annual goals. The administrators, teachers and parents are regularly informed about any changes made for the ELL-SWD in their IEPs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELL-SWDs are in the least restrictive environment. The fact that the ENL teachers push in to these classes, results in the student receiving instruction in the environment most conducive to his or her learning style. This also allows the ENL teachers to work closely with the classroom teachers so that they can provide instruction that meets both the ELL needs of the student as well as those specific needs addressed in the student's IEP. The Emerson School is using curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment . It is using the framework for Great Schools where instruction is customized, inclusive, and is aligned to the Common Core and high standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. In order to ensure that flexible programming is used to maximize time of ELL students with disabilities (SWDs) spent with their non-disabled peers the Integrated Co-Teaching classrooms are opened, and all school curricular and extracurricular programs are available to all students including SWDs. The following is the criteria used to place ELL-SWDs in ICT classes. Students are placed in ICT classes based on how well do in the class. If they are exceeding their modified promotional criteria, that is an indication that we need to be more flexible in scheduling. The ENL teachers meet on the daily basis with the classroom teachers to discuss students’ strengths and weaknesses and to look at students’ work. ENL teacher is using a program called ATLAS Rubicon and Skedula for planning and preparations and to find the standards used for planning the lessons. All the teachers meet and discuss all modifications for all ELL including ELL-SWDs. The goal is to plan on their instructional and educational strategies as a grade team and to collaborate with auxiliary staff members. During Grade level meetings teachers discuss ELL-SWDs’ strengths, weaknesses and progress. Teachers attend PDs in school as well as outside the school, special education meetings, team care meeting, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher Association meetings and others which also give them support and ideas on diverse needs and instructional strategies for our ELL students including ELL-SWDs. In addition, our bilingual staff is always in place to provide additional language support for our diverse needs students. ENL and other teachers combine precisely leveled, print-based learning and teaching resources combined with engaging and motivating interactive multimedia technology that supports language and literacy proficiency for ELLs-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. It also provides an ELL-SWDs component that supports the class curriculum and provides ELLs with scaffolding. All the teachers have access to online interactive Math, ELA and other subject areas lessons on all grades to use with the ELL students and with ELL-SWDs according to their goals in their IEPs. Inquiry team works on compiling the students’ data and using them to target the students showing deficiencies in their learning. In order to ensure that flexible programming is used to maximize time of ELL students with disabilities (SWDs) spent with their non-disabled peers all school curricular and extracurricular programs are available to all students including SWDs. All the teachers and service providers including those who serve the ELL-SWDs : PT, speech teacher, SETTS teacher, AIS teacher, OT teacher, ENL teacher, guidance counselor meet to align their schedules for all ELL-SWDs and they are flexible to change their schedules and to change curricular and instructional planning according to the changes in the students’ IEPs. The 2018-19 CEP 56  scheduling of ELL students with IEPs plan ensures that they receive their mandated special education and ENL services in a general-education, least-restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention services in our school for ELLs in Math, ELA and other content areas are SETTS, ENL, AIS, Math intervention, Guidance Counselor, OT, Physical Therapy and Speech. The language of instruction is English. The translators over the phone or our bilingual paras are used for translations if necessary. IEP evaluations and parent teachers meetings are conducted for our students with special needs. Apart from ENL program and other intervention programs the classroom teachers are concerned with the language needs of ELLs, constantly monitor students’ understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning, and scaffold the instruction with visual aids such as maps, and illustrations to increase comprehension. Target intervention programs in our school are research based instructional programs which strategies addresses the needs of all ELL students and all ELL subgroups ( Newcomers ELLs, Developing ELLs, Long-term ELLs, Former ELLs, Sife ELLs, ELLs with disabilities). They are helping our ELLs not only to learn English, but also to develop in their content classes Ela, Math, Social Studies, etc. and prepare them for high school. The following intervention programs are available to all ELL subgroups and are conducted in English: ELA – Academic Intervention Services, MyON, iReady, Saturday Success Academy. ENL – Afterschool Program for ELLs (Title III). Math - Academic Intervention Services, Saturday Success Academy, Lunch time math tutoring, iXL, iRready. Others: Specialized High School Prep (for 8th graders), advisory program, counseling, Arts and Literacy After School Program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends this year the Emerson School considers to implement many new programs and improvements for the upcoming new year. Our school purchased many new books for ENL teachers as well for the students: new social studies books , Phonics Plus, Finish Line New York ELLs, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, Scaffolding the Coprehension Toolkit for ELLs, bilingual and English dictionaries , Picture Disctionaries for Spanish, Arabic, French speakers, grammar for ESL learners . We also use the Great Source Access ESL Newcomer Program to be used with ELLs new to the NYC system. The school has also purchased NYC Core Curriculum; ELA Classroom Library Native Language Collection; and is planning to purchase Brain Pop and Flocabulary programs for the whole school. Our school has purchased also programs that will enhance content area learning acquisition of the ELL population. Those programs are for example, ILIT EL reading program which is used to accelerate English Language Proficiency which was purchased this school year. We are also planning to continue to use ILIT EL for ELLs after school program. More classes are now equipped with the smart boards. The ENL teacher is planning also to buy new programs and other resources for our ELLs, for example more bilingual dictionaries, electronic bilingual dictionaries and thesauri for ELL students to use during regular instruction. Additionally, this year we hired additional ENL teacher, so our school can be in compliance providing all the required minutes for our ELLs. This year many laptops and ipads were purchased for the students to use. Additionally, our schools goal will be for all members of the Emerson Learning Community to have a clear understanding of how to create questioning and discussion techniques design to promote student thinking, rigor, and alignment to the Common Core Standards. Our ELA and Math content-area teams will meet weekly to discuss the creation and implementation of higher – order questions and discussion topics. Grade teams will meet weekly to discuss grade-specific issues regardless of content area. Also this year teachers will share curriculum and lesson – plan resources on Atlas Rubicon and Skedula to record information about the standards that they are using to plan their assignment and lessons. Furthermore, 8th grade Emerson scholars will receive appropriate guidance to support students ’Transition to High School’. Next, all 6 th and 7th students, and 8 th graders will continue to participate in an advisory program at least once a week that targets character building and socio - emotional development. Students, especially those that are mandated for counseling will receive counseling services to promote their socio-emotional development. Next, our school is planning to use for the next year BrainPop, Flocabulary and Boardworks programs for all the students. Lastly, the school is beginning to implement the "Leader in Me" program and "Project Boost." Both these programs are designed to support the social and emotional development of students. The school has a focus on including ELL students in both programs. 2018-19 CEP 57  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the Emerson School we never had a bilingual program, therefore, at this time, no programs/services for ELL’s will be discontinued. In the future If we have enough ELL parents to indicate this program choice we will offer it in our school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs spend the majority of classes immersed in English-speaking classes. This means that the ELL students have the same access to the same SES programs as their peers. The Emerson School invites ELLs to participate in all school programs (curricular and extracurricular) and they have equal access to all afterschool programs and supplemental services offered in our building. They are available to all parents and students in the school. ELL students take part in the community building activities, enjoy participation in our basketball team, student government and students’ performances on the stage. Some of former and present ELLs have been chosen to be part of the Student Government. Our school provides all required support services according to ELLs ages, needs and grade levels. We provide Academic Intervention Services through afterschool programs including extended days services, ENL afterschool program, After school Math intervention program for ELLS which focus on assessed needs for additional instruction to improve literacy and mathematics skills. Many our ELLs fully participate and attend our afterschool programs. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families. Throughout the year, ELL parents and ELL students come to the school to take part in community celebrations and the school wide events. All parents are invited to parents’ workshop and volunteering including the Monthly Spirit Days, school wide events, parents' workshops and volunteering. At these events, the school and community can come together to recognize ELL student achievements in arts and academics. Furthermore, our school is organizing many school trips where ELL parents and ELL students often participate. This year the Emerson school will host at least four parent workshops and parents including ELLs are invited and those events will include a joint school/PTA curriculum night and award ceremony celebrating students and parents and a potluck dinner event. We are collaborating with CBO partner to identify and execute events and activities requested by parents and the school community. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend school wide community building events such as International Festival, Career Day and Spring barbecue. Our ELLs also participate in our after School Program: “Arts and Literacy After School Program.” In addition, our school is working to maintain partnerships with Alpha Phi Alpha Intercollegiate Fraternity, C.H.A.P.S. program as well as extended day AIS program and Uncommon Schools Charter School Network. There is also Saturday Academy for those ELL students who need to improve their skills in Math and Writing. Our school invites parents to participate in all school programs and ELL parents are provided with the fliers that are in their native languages. Interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. We use paras in the building to translate conversations with ELL parents during the meetings or phone calls and translation and Interpretation services to invite them to our school, so the ELLs can fully participate. Translation and Interpretation Services are offered to increase the involvement of ELL parents and to help to communicate with the ELL students, additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff, ELL students and ELL parents. Bilingual paras are available to help to communicate with ELL students and ELL parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our Freestanding ENL program does not use a particular text to meet the demands of Common Core learning standards. Students are provided with books, tapes and assisted technology to promote student achievement and success and materials are often shared with the classroom teachers. The ENL teachers use technology to support ELLs in the classroom. The ELL students have regular access to their own laptops and Ipads. They use them for work in ELA and Math and for access to Myon and Iready , and other programs. The content teacher also makes use of a smart board during regular instruction. The ENL teacher also uses computers, laptops, smart board, CD player with radio, iPads’ and technology lab, so students can use programs that help them with phonics, vocabulary, reading, writing, and math. We have sets of Ipads in our ENl classroom for ELLs. In addition, the Internet resources are used to practice math, ELA and other content areas for example, Starfall, 2018-19 CEP 58  Readworks websites. Our ELA , AIS, SETTS and TESOL licensed teachers use a variety of books and materials recommended for our ELL students. We have also access to Smart Boards in the classroom that can be used in the conjunction with some excellent technological resources: Brain Pop, Flocabulary, Discovery, Education Streaming videos, and other resources that are avalilable to all ELLs. This year ENL teachers also started to use ILITELL reading program for our ELLs which complements core ELA curriculum and the content area topics. In this program the lessons are focused on whole class instruction, small group instructions and independent practice. There is also component in this program for the Newcomer ELLs including phonic program, many visuals, etc. Also this year teachers shared curriculum and lesson –plans resources on Atlas Rubicon and Skedula to record information about the standards that they are using to plan their assignment and lessons. All the teachers build on common resources to differentiate for ELLs and other subgroups to target specific needs. In addition, content area materials are shared with the classroom teachers such as I-Ready students books, which provides data-driven insights and support for successful implementation of the new standards. I-Ready also is proved to predict student performance on state assessments. We also use many other educational materials that are used to support the content areas such as : technology resources available to teachers, online software such as Atlas Rubicon, I Ready, iXL, and MyOn that collects data on student strengths and weaknesses and can be used to triangulate student achievement with classroom assessment and city and state assessments. During integrated ENL and integrated ENL instruction the ENL teacher as well as classroom teacher are building English language skills through content area instruction using content area materials as well as native language materials with the home language support. Native language materials are used to support ELLs. We have textbooks and supplementary reading materials in different languages, use content-area videos for students with limited English reading levels, and provide simplified language materials with visual components for our ELL students. Newcomer ELLs are provided access to native-language translations of key texts and independent reading material (when available). Electronic translation is provided when instruction ally appropriate (e.g. online translators like Google). Translating dictionaries are provided for student use during content-area classes. Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided with native-language support when instruction ally appropriate. This includes verbal and written translation and explanation of key texts, access to translation dictionaries, and use of electronic translation resources, such as online translating software. Native language support is provided in the form of English and Native Language dictionaries, books and audio books. Each ENL classroom often shared with other classroom teacher has flashcards for essential vocabulary in addition to environmental study aids such as globes, maps, charts and content aligned manipulative. Books in the different languages, Weber dictionaries, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries are available to support instruction as well as for the students to take home. As a testing accommodation, the bilingual glossaries may be provided when taking all State examinations and the Department of Education may provide them with translated editions of some tests. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in the form of English and Native Language dictionaries, books and audio books. Each ENL classroom often share with other classroom teacher flashcards for essential vocabulary in addition to environmental study aids such as globes, maps, charts and content aligned manipulative. Where possible, content teachers also provide native language support in the form of direct instruction in the student's native language. Additionally, native language support is also offered through the implementation of a buddy system. This involves pairing a student with a student who speaks the same L1 but is more advanced in English. This allows a primary support system within the ENL classroom. Students who are going to take their state exams in their native language are assessed throughout the school year in both English and their native language. Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided with native-language support when instruction ally appropriate. This includes verbal and written translation and explanation of key texts, access to translation dictionaries, and use of electronic translation resources, such as online translating software. In the Emerson school there is native language support in ENL class and it is equally afforded to all students. Students are allowed to use their native language with the teacher and/or peer to express understanding or ask for clarification. Books in the different languages, Weber dictionaries, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries are available to support instruction as well as for the students to take home. As a testing accommodation, the bilingual glossaries may be provided when taking all State examinations and the Department of Education may provide them 2018-19 CEP 59  with translated editions of some tests. In TBE program is design so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. As all ELLs students develop English language skills, time in the home language decreases. When ELLs reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT they are placed in a monolingual class in English with home language supports. Skills used in home language acquisition are skills that a student can use for faster and more successful acquisition of English literacy. Therefore, in TBE programs students transfer home language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the home language before steadily transitioning in English. As students’ English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. Dual language programs students continue developing students home languages, as well as English language skills. English proficient students are given the opportunity to learn a new language. Both groups provide good linguistic role models for each other. In those programs students receive half of their instruction in English and half of their instruction in the other language. Language is taught through content areas as well as through literacy. In this program, new language is often referred as the target language (Spanish, Chinese). In Freestanding English as a new language program (ENL) provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition and integrated ENL instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. Students in this program can come from many different language backgrounds and English may be the only common language among the students. During integrated ENL instruction the ENL teacher as well as classroom teacher are building English language skills through content area instruction with the home language support. In the Emerson School integrated and standalone ENL instruction is implemented as per CR Part 154.2. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services support and resources directly correspond to the ELL's ages and grade levels. All materials and resources available to students are aligned to grade level standards. The required services support, and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. The 8 th graders, for example, are invited to the high school for the students’ orientation before the admission process. The guidance counselor, social worker, teachers and administrators help students with the admission process and are involving not only ELL students, but also their parents. All the services provide support needed by ENL students to achieve and maintain a satisfactory level of academic performance. ELL service at the Emerson school is a collaborative effort that involves the ELL specialists, the student’s classroom teacher, and other specialists (speech teacher, PT, etc.) the student may learn with throughout the year. ENL teachers seek to offer support primarily during the Language Arts block, but also students receive support as needed during content-area times such as math, social studies or science. The resources used for ELLs correspond to the grade levels of the ELLs. Grade level and the content area books are frequently used as well as the leveled library, and various visual resources, pictures dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, maps, etc. ELL acquire and develop English language skills while meeting their grade and age level standards in core subjects. Services and resources are adapted for our ELL-SWDs , support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels while being appropriate to their cognitive needs. The Emerson School is using curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. ENLteachers and other teachers use differentiated instruction and combine precisely leveled, print based learning and teaching resources with engaging motivated interactive multimedia technology that supports language and literacy proficiency for ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. All teachers meet and discuss all modifications for all ELLs including ELL-SWDs. During Grade level meetings teachers discuss ELL-SWD’s strengths, weaknesses and progress. Teachers attend Pds in school as well as outside the school, special education meetings, team care meetings, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher Association meetings, which also give them support and ideas on diverse needs and instructional strategies for our ELL students including ELL-SWDs. All school curricular and extracurricular programs are available to all students including SWDs and correspond to their ages and grade levels. All the teachers and service providers including those who serve the ELL-SWDs are flexible and change their schedules and curricular and instructional planning according to the changes in the students’ IEP. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 60  Our Freestanding ENL program does not use a particular text to meet the demands of Common Core learning standards. Students are provided with books, tapes and assisted technology to promote student achievement and success and materials are often shared with the classroom teachers. The ENL teachers use technology to support ELLs in the classroom. The ELL students have regular access to their own laptops and ipads. They use them for work in ELA and Math and other content area classes and for access to Myon and Iready , IlitELL and other programs. The content area teacher also makes use of a smart board during regular instruction. The ENL teachers also use computers, laptops, smart boards, CD players with radio, iPads’ and technology lab, so students can use programs that help them with phonics, vocabulary, reading, writing, and math. In addition, the internet resources are used to practice math, ELA and other content areas for example, Starfall. Our ELA , AIS, SETTS and TESOL licenced teachers use a variety of books and materials recommended for our ELL students. We have also access to Smart Boards in the classroom that can be used in the conjunction with some excellent technological resources: Brain Pop, Discovery, Education Streaming videos, and other resources that are avalilable to all ELLs. Also this year teachers will share curriculum and lesson –plan resources on Atlas Rubicon and Skedula to record information about the standards that they are using to plan their assignment and lessons. Teacher build on common resources to differentiate for ELLs and other subgroups to target specific needs. In addition, content area materials are shared with the classroom teachers such as I-Ready students books, which provides data-driven insights and support for successful implementation of the new standards. I-Ready also is proved to predict student performance on state assessments. We also use many other educational materials that are used to support the content areas such as : technology resources available to teachers, online software such as Atlas Rubicon, I Ready, iXL, and MyOn that collects data on student strengths and weaknesses and can be used to triangulate student achievement with classroom assessment and city and state assessments. During integrated ENL and integrated ENL instruction the ENL teacher as well as classroom teacher are building English language skills through content area instruction using content area materials as well as native language materials with the home language support. Native language materials are used to support ELLs. We have textbooks and supplementary reading materials in different languages, use content-area videos for students with limited English reading levels, and provide simplified language materials with visual components for our ELL students. Newcomer ELLs are provided access to native-language translations of key texts and independent reading material (when available). Electronic translation is provided when instruction ally appropriate (e.g. online translators like Google). Translating dictionaries are provided for student use during content-area classes. Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided with native-language support when instruction ally appropriate. This includes verbal and written translation and explanation of key texts, access to translation dictionaries, and use of electronic translation resources, such as online translating software. Native language support is provided in the form of English and Native Language dictionaries, books and audio books. Each ENL classroom often shared with other classroom teacher has flashcards for essential vocabulary in addition to environmental study aids such as globes, maps, charts and content aligned manipulative. Books in the different languages, Weber dictionaries, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries are available to support instruction as well as for the students to take home. As a testing accommodation, the bilingual glossaries may be provided when taking all State examinations and the Department of Education may provide them with translated editions of some tests. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school is currently liaising with elementary schools in the area with the end goal of implementing orientation days for future prospective students. This will allow the student time to acclimate to the school and the teacher time to identify any resources that might be needed to assist the child's learning. We introduced a new Summer Jump Start program for incoming 6th graders, to assist them with reading and writing during the summer months. At the beginning of the new school year, or when a newcomer is identified we conduct orientations with the parents as they enroll their children and after the child is identified as an eligible candidate for ENL instructional services. All the letters to parents are translated in their native languages. The over the phone translation is used if necessary and bilingual paras are also available. Our parents and students 2018-19 CEP 61  are invited to attend and participate. In addition, there are meetings with the parent coordinator, school counselor, principal and vice principal, the school secretary and other pedagogues to discuss the child’s placement, to gather necessary documentation before the enrollment and to conduct the oral interview with the parent. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently students are offered French language electives within the school curriculum. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The following is the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. The professional development and support for our school staff is offered to help better prepare our ELLs to achieve academic success throughout the year. All ELL personnel at our school including all teachers of ELLs: guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational, physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, parent coordinators and non-pedagogic staff including all administrators of the Emerson School participate in numerous faculty conferences, department meetings , additional Pds and outside Professional Development opportunities. Professional development at the Emerson School is provided also by school staff, community learning support personnel organization, all personnel who work with ELLs: subject area teachers, common branches teachers and paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, parent coordinator and other school personnel. These workshops address the latest instructional methodologies for teaching ENL using core content subjects as well as providing ideas on how to effectively advocate for the ELL population. The ENL personnel also attend regular network meetings as well as BETAC (Bilingual Education Technical Assistance Center) workshops. During our monthly faculty conferences, different staff members and outside speakers will present topics to support teachers with effective instructional strategies. Additionally, the ENL teachers collaborate with other ENL teachers in the building . The ENL staff also presents ELL related topics to classroom teachers such as analyzing NYSESLAT data, ENL methodology and strategies and differentiating ELL instruction. Teachers and all personnel at the school also meet regularly to discuss English Language Learners' academic progress, data and successful instructional strategies for ELLs. Additionally, the ENL staff also attend cluster meetings so that they can conference with the teachers of specific ELL students. ELL personnel also attend support PD for ELL related paperwork such as Part 154.2; LAP or BESIS. These sessions are also provided by the school CFN. Our PD meetings involve Common Core learning standards, differentiated Instruction in Literacy, professional development and workshops around strengthening questioning and discussion in the classroom, Writing workshops, Math and Content Areas, data analysis to inform instruction, technology sessions that instruct ENL teachers and content area teachers how to use online resources to make instruction more comprehensible, and looking at standards in ELA, ENL, Math, Science and Social Studies. The schools share all resources with the ELL teachers. Technology sessions instruct content area teachers as well as ENL teachers of how to use online resources and different online programs such as ATLAS Rubicon, Skedula, iReady, iXL, IlitELL and MyOn to make instruction more comprehensible. The teachers are trained according to Danielson framework of teaching. This year teachers will attend out of building professional development and develop workshops designed to turn-key information to the school faculty. 2018-19 CEP 62  The student support committee (made up of guidance, lead teachers, paraprofessionals, school aide and leadership) meets to discuss the unique needs that our subgroups, including ELLs, require in order to be academically successful. During the beginning of the school year transition concerns are discussed and interventions are planned. Later on during the school year, as each new student is admitted to the school, similar needs are addressed and implemented when appropriate. The following is our calendar for school Professional Development dates (in our Professional Learning Communities) for 2017—2018 for ELL personnel at our school: guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational, physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, parent coordinators, all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff: September 11, September 18, September 25, October 2, October 16, October 23, October 30, November 6, November 13, November 20, November 27, December 4, December 11, December 18, January 1, January 8, January 22, January 29, February 5, February 12, February 26, March 5, March 12, March 19, March 26, April 9, April 16, April 23, April 30, May 1, May 8, May 15, May 22, May 29, June 4, June 11, June 18, June 25. Further out of building professional development will be identified for individual teachers, groups of teachers and non-pedagogic staff based on classroom observation and administrative review of student work products and other factors will be taken for consideration. The teachers of ELLs will continue to offer professional developments and workshops in schools and outside the schools that specifically help them to support ELLs as they engage in the CCLS and in which there is a high impact on differentiated instruction, classroom engagement, academic language development strategies, questioning and discussion techniques and targeted workshops on assessments. Those meetings include grade meetings, study groups, faculty conferences, grade conferences, Regional Professional Development sessions as well as the PD meetings from school. Additional opportunities are provided by the network, Uncommon Schools and the district. This year ELL teachers and non-pedagogic staff plans to attend a variety of off-site workshops to promote collaboration between content area and language teachers and we focus on developing the curriculum and instruction to provide a rigorous Common Core aligned and experiential education for all of our scholars. We are also engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students at the Emerson School are provided with a curriculum that emphasizes experiential learning, character development and prepares them for future academic and professional endeavors. Our staff at the Emerson School including the ENL teachers, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator provide parents and students with information about different schools, helping make the proper placement for ELL students as they transition from Junior-High School to High School. This will be accomplished through tailoring the advisory curriculum to meet the needs of each respective grade and measured by at least 75% of 8th grade students passing their four core content area classes and being accepted into their selected high school. The guidance counselor will focus specifically on preparing students and parents for the high school selection process. Additionally, in September and October students will be encouraged to take the Specialized High School Entrance Exam. Our staff is also organizing Carrier Days to introduce and familiarize students with different occupations and professions that helps them to make the right choices. The guidance counselor attends professional development workshops in order to assist ELLs as they transition and turnkeys this information that she has shared with the teachers and administrators who in turn educate students about different choices by supplying them with the materials and resources. Together with the Parent Coordinator, the Guidance Counselor, ENL teachers and other school personell organizes workshops for the parents, distributes the fliers and brochures in their native language informing about the open school days at various locations. The ENL teachers and the content-area teachers who serve ELLs use this information to collaboratively create action plans to support ELLs during the initial transition to middle school. 2018-19 CEP 63  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Emerson School provide individual meetings with parents or person in parental relation of ELLs at least once a year, in addition to other generally required meetings to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Those meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Interpretation and translations are provided as needed by para, teacher or through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. The records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parents needs are accommodated (e.g., in person meetings, phone calls) are kept in school by ENL teacher in the central location. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the Emerson School parents are encouraged to be involved meaningfully in their children’s education. As the school continues to grow, our community highly values parent involvement and wants to plan both school and PTA events in a strategic manner that maximized attendance. All parents are invited to support the school and their children by becoming active members of the PTA and the School Leadership Team building a unique and collaborative school culture which is one of the school’s strengths. They are invited to meet with classroom and cluster teachers; during parent orientations, Open School Night, and parent – teacher conference days, and parents meetings to discuss their child’s academic progress. If requested by the parents, teachers will also meet with them individually. Family Game Nights, Back to school breakfast, Bring dad to school day and Family Movie Nights are also provided specifically for the parents of our ELL population. In the Emerson School there are also Monthly Spirit days, school wide events, Field Day, Parent/Child workshop, Book fairs, Family literacy meetings, parents’ workshops, International Festivals and Spring barbecues. By June 2017, the Emerson School will host at least four workshops and/or community events in coordination and collaboration with the school’s Parent Teacher Association. They will include join school/PTA curriculum night, an award ceremony celebrating students and parents, and a potluck dinner event. We have other different programs for parents and students throughout the school year such as Career Day, Book Sale, etc. and ELL parents and students are invited to participate. All parents including parents of ELLs are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Our school is respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. We are providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities in a format and in a language that parents are able to understand. We are also convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. This year we also offered parents after school Title III program for ENL students and immigrant students by assisting students in developing English language proficiency in comprehension, listening, reading and writing and math skills where our ENL teachers collaborated closely with Math and ELA teacher to deliver instruction. The Emerson School is also developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication design to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. Additionally, we are encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. Bilingual ELL parents are also invited to come to the school and participate in one on one reading sessions with their child. Our parent coordinator serves as a liaison between the school and families. He provides parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and works to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting all parents. He maintains a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and files a report with the central office. Also, he is actively involved in providing parents of ELLs with appropriate information and services in a language they understand, helps parents access the Aris Parent Link and the PupilPath link and ensures that parents of ELLs are contributing members of the education community. Furthermore, the parent coordinator provides parents with information about adult English learning opportunities available in the community. The parent coordinator is working in 2018-19 CEP 64  the collaboration with ENL teachers to help ENL students and to provide parents with the necessary information about the school. The Emerson School provides translation services for parents as well as translated notices, and materials through the NYC Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit. Our school supports parents and families of students by sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in the language that parents can understand. Phone blast is often used (providing information through phone calls) and Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additionally, during the meetings and workshops there is a incensed pedagogue or para who serves as an on site interpreter. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jakub Lau, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Emerson School School DBN: 28Q287 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jakub Lau Title Principal Latina Lewis Assistant Principal Childs Darnell Parent Coordinator Olga Tyminska ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shuna Saul Morian Parent Rasheed Bility (SETTS) Teacher/Subject Area Ludnie Desire (Math) Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Kristen Volonakis-Rowland School Counselor Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Robert Zuzzolo Maria Dominguez n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Service Coordinator Other Related Services Provider Other Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 10/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 n/a n/a 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q287 School Name: The Emerson School Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Olga n/a n/a n/a Tyminska ENL teacher n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Yes n/a n/a n/a Yes n/a n/a n/a * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Students Registration form and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is provided to all of our parents upon the registration at the school. Right there, in the office, parents are notified about all the translation services available: the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit, and Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services, and also our multi-speaking stuff. During the process of registration the interview is conducted by one of our pedagogues as for the parent language preference and choice. The Home Language Identification Survey Part III contains a question informing the administration, and school stuff about the parents' communication language preference. This information can later be accessed in the ATS system using the Home Language report (RHLA), Citywide/District Parents’ Preferred Language Report (RCPL), School Level Emergency Contact Form (RECF)5, School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON), School Level Adult Preferred Language ReporLanguage 2018-19 CEP 68  Access Coordinatort (RAPL), School Level Adult Detail Report (RADL), and on the blue emergency contact cards located in the main office. The ELL Parent Information Kit (EPIC) which contains documents available in several languages is placed in a designated cabinet in ENL classroom, and it is also available at the DOE website: http://schools.nyc.go/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/Parent+Information.htm 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali French Haitian Creole Arabic Urdu English Spanish 38 3 1 1 3 364 85 7.68% 0.61% 0.2% 0.2% 0.61% 73.54% 17.17% 40 5 1 1 3 360 84 8.1% 1.01% 0.2% 0.2% 0.61% 72.87% 17% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We don’t have any parents’ preferred languages that represent at least 10% population of our school (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PT Conference announcements Sept/Nov/Mar/May Letters from school Leadership Throughout the year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use over-the-phone interpretation service: bilingual school personnel. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other 2018-19 CEP 69  New York State testing dates March/April/May/June Parent Curriculum Conference Sept. ELLs Entitlement/non-entitlement/continuation letters Sept. languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use DOE Intranet template(s). 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELLs; Parent Orientation Sept/Oct Parent-Teacher Conferences October/March Curriculum Night Family Night Oct Nov interpretation service(s)? We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. We use bi-lingual school staff including paras, for other languages, we use on-site interpreters from vendor agency if necessary. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. There are many procedures to reach LEP parents in the event of emergency. The Emerson school maintains an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. This information is maintained in ATS an in the student emergency card. Language Identification Cards identifying parent’s primary language are available in the office . Over the phone-translation Unit is contacted and paras are available for translations if necessary. The contact 2018-19 CEP 70  is recorded in the parent teacher log. Letters are sent to parents in their languages and we use in house assistance of paras and teachers . If the language is not available, we contact translation Unit. There are also procedures to allow LEP parents to reach school personnel in the event of emergency. Our school provides translations and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance. We provide them with all the translation services available in our school and outside the school in case they need to use the translation services. We also provide parents at the registration Parents’ Bill of Rights and A Parent’s Guide to Special Education in the covered languages. Both documents make parents aware of their rights to languages services. The posters at the entrance of the school also provide LEP parents in different languages instruction on where and how to obtain interpretation services. These documents are distributed to parents at the beginning of each school year and can also be accessed on the DOE’s website (www.schools.nyc.gov). Parents can learn about the school's plan for emergency response, including parental access during emergencies, school emergency contact information, meet-up locations, and other plans. Parents in our school provide the school with information about any unique needs their children may have. This is accomplished by filling out by parents out an emergency information form and we are working with school health staff to be sure there is an emergency plan on file for the child that includes information on health issues and what is needed during other school emergencies. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Emerson School ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-633 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school follows Language Access Plan to ensure the provision of appropriate translation and interpretation services for limited English proficient (LEP) parents are in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. Training on the goals and requirements of Chancellor’s Regulation A-633 along with available resources to comply with this requirements is provided to appropriate school based staff. Additionally, school based language Access Coordinator will turnkey the language access information to the school personnel. The compliance will be monitored to ensure that all relevant school personnel is aware and follows the procedure. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, school signage are translated and located at the entrance to the Emerson School. There will be a multilingual welcome poster and the signs placed to inform all of the parents about the language interpretation services being available. The signs will be made in the most prominent covered languages. At present we are working on accommodating our main office, so that the parents will be provided with a copy of the translated versions of Bill Of Rights and a copy of Parent Guide to Language Access which inform them about their translation and interpretation services rights. In order to ensure that the language barrier does not prevent the ELL parents from reaching the school administration, the school safety plan will contain procedures to 2018-19 CEP 71  provide them with the most appropriate translation and interpretation services. Language ID Guide will be placed at the security desk and main office. In addition, the ENL teacher will give each parent of ELLs the Department of Education’s website, which shall provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. This website also informs parents that they shall provide interpretation services, to the maximum extent practicable within the budget appropriated for such services, during regular business hours, to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate with school staff and school officials regarding critical information about their child’s education. The parent engagement events where this is expressed are PTA meetings, parents’ nights, different parent workshops. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The needs of parents and feedback on the quality and availability of services are evaluated in informal and formal ways through parents – teachers’ conferences, meetings, workshops, schools events, PTA meetings, etc. The formal and informal surveys are distributed to the parents during meetings: workshops, conferences and school events. The educators and administrators will also listen and have a conversation with parents, try to answer their questions and concerns and gather feedback from them. Parents are provided with surveys upon their child's enrollment in the school in order to know their concerns and/or questions and are encouraged to be a part of activities that enrich our curriculum. Our school implemented the feedback to improve our language services. Responses expressed in the Learning Environment Surveys are also taken into consideration to assess their needs and concerns. Additionally, the school’s Parent Coordinator maintains continuous communication with parents. All the data received is then looked at by the school leadership team. Using this data they then create appropriate workshops to address the needs of our parents and feedback on the quality and availability services. We consider scheduling a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback from them. 2018-19 CEP 72 
