2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 24Q290 P.S. 290 Principal: JOSÉ LUIS JIMÉNEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information A.C.E. Academy for Scholars P.S. 290Q 24Q290 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 55-20 Metropolitan Avenue Ridgewood, NY 11385 718.571.6900 Phone Number: 718.571.6920 Fax: Jose Jimenez jjimenez5@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jose Jimenez Tabitha Auricchio Linda Byszynski TishanaNelson Linda Byszynski N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Chan Superintendent: District 24 Office 98-50 50 th Avenue Queens, NY 11368 MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718. 592.3357 Phone Number: 718.592.3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens North Field Support Center Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917.225.2020 Fax: 718.391.8320 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jose Jimenez Tabitha Auricchio Linda Byszynski *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Steven Borst Tania Blondo Tishana Nelson Barbara Piascik Jody King Camarra AiyessHale Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Susan Coronel Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The A.C.E. Academy for Scholars P.S. 290Q’s mission states that “ Our personalized instruction nurtures multiple intelligences and we meet the needs of every child through small group instruction and individualized learning plans using a data driven approach. We have a unified purpose and believe that every child can succeed. As a result, we collaborate to cultivate critical thinking through effective planning, questioning, and a rigorous interdisciplinary curriculum. At P.S. 290 we are all accountable and responsible for every child’s academic, social and emotional development, and all scholars develop the courage to achieve academic excellence.” We work diligently to support our scholars so that they embody our core values: accountability, courage and excellence (A.C.E.). 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 290 is dedicated to the highest levels of scholar achievement. Our scholars perform with distinction because of our innovative approach to teaching and learning. Our balanced literacy program includes a comprehensive phonemic awareness and comprehension component. We believe in giving scholars the opportunity to learn math in a progression from concrete to pictorial to abstract. At P.S. 290, scholars study Global Connections, which emphasizes the link between the classroom and the international culture around us. In addition, our school is a college readiness school; as a result, our STEAM course provides scholars with a liberal arts college education approach, where they create, discover, explore, and express their thoughts and ideas, preparing them for elementary school and beyond. Lastly, scholars experience the arts through Performing Arts and Visual Arts, where they courageously develop performance skills and work collaboratively on productions with their peers. In addition to our rigorous academic programs, P.S. 290 distinguishes itself by its commitment to developing the character of each scholar. Starting at the Kindergarten level, scholars meet in small groups that offer a personalized focus on social development and civic service. By living our core values of accountability, courage, and excellence, P.S. 290 exemplifies a harmonious community that strives for excellence academically and socially. P.S. 290 nurtures and develops each scholars' physical development through our Health and Physical Education course. Scholars also learn healthy habits and other important character traits such as team work and perseverance through our Health and Physical Education as well as our wellness program. We know that it takes an all hands on deck approach to ensure every scholar is successful. As such, we raise scholar achievement through a collaborative approach. Our teachers meet regularly during common and vertical planning preparation periods, using classroom data to drive personalized instruction. Our partners support our work, making generous donations of time and treasure. Maspeth Town Hall supports our families with after school programming by providing scholars with homework assistance and offering academic games and physical activities. We also partner with organizations, such as Inside Broadway, and Queens College to support our various Arts programs. Additionally, Council Member, Elizabeth Crowley and her staff, consistently partner with us around obtaining instructional resources and identifying partnerships. Finally, our parent involvement is of paramount importance and each parent plays an integral role in helping to ensure our scholars’ success. Our parents, in collaboration with our PTA help us fund the materials needed to offer our scholars a variety of after school enrichment programs based on scholar interest surveys such as Arts and Crafts, Tee Ball, Theater, Soccer, Basketball, Crocheting and many others! P.S. 290 has a diverse scholar population that is representative of the borough of Queens. Our populations are as follows: 45% Hispanic, 28% White, 21% Asian population and 5% Black. Approximately 7% of scholars identify as English Language Learners, and 5% of scholars are identified as scholars with special needs. We also have one section of Gifted and Talented on each grade level. Families have a diverse range of incomes, with 55% of scholars qualifying as Title I. All of our scholars have unique talents, gifts, and needs, and our instructional philosophy is that through personalization, accountability, courage and excellence all scholars will believe and achieve. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress in the areas of Effective School Leadership and Trust. Our area of focus is around ensuring that we have strong family and community ties as it takes an entire community and all stakeholders to ensure scholar success. As our credo states, “We believe we can do all things, and become anything we dream, we are responsible for ourselves and our actions. We have compassion for others and we will create a better world. If we believe and work hard we will achieve. We believe in our scholars, our teacher, and our parents and we achieve! 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q290 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 542 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 21 5 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 66.0% % Attendance Rate 57.7% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 48.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.07 0% 29% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 47 45 21 94.5% 8.7% 9.4% 3.1% 16.1% 3.0% 0 11% 6.5 71.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the academic programming informed by the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, Quality Review Data, and School-Wide Data, we identified the rigorous instruction element of the Framework for Great Schools as an area of continued focus as it is our goal to ensure that we maintain rigorous practices in our community for all scholars and in all areas. Based on the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, 78% of teachers say that they need multiple opportunities to create coherent progressions within the standards from previous grades to current grade so that student knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts. Our Quality Review indicated we were well developed, exceeding target. Based on school-wide data, the majority of scholars engaged in rigorous discourse as evidenced by teacher observation reports, assessments and state test scores. Presently, we engage scholars in a variety of instructional approaches that are scholar-centered and that promote multiple intelligences and social emotional development. To continue to provide scholars with rigorous instructional models, we will focus on project-based learning, balanced literacy, questioning and discussion techniques, and delivery of differentiated instruction. By continuing to foster scholar independence, scholars will build the capacity to independently self-reflect, provide and make use of peer feedback in all academic areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 290Q will focus on implementing Project-Based Learning Units of Study and Balanced Literacy across the content areas by ensuring that phonemic awareness, phonics, shared reading, guided reading, and independent reading are being implemented as evidenced by classroom observation practices in advance. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Balanced Literacy PD opportunities.  Project-Based Learning PD opportunities   Video of modeled lessons from peers.  PD on Literacy in other content areas, such as new Social Inter-visitations Studies curriculum. PreK-5 th Sept-Nov ELLs, SWDs, Lowest-third Dec-March Instructional Leaders, Coaches, Teachers, Mentors, Paraprofessionals, Counselors, Speech Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement April-June How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, funds and resources will be allocated to ensuring that scholars are equipped to demonstrate proficiency in the different learning activities. Teachers will have access to technology resources to support in the implementation of instructional programs as well as time embedded in their instructional day to collaborate with teacher team members to analyze scholar work products and data. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 14  As part of P.S. 290Q’s continuous improvement planning, a mid-point progress monitoring benchmark will occur to analyze trends around goal effectiveness and areas in need of improvement as evidenced by scholar baseline to mid-year data results administered in November, February and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Beginning of the year, Middle of the year, and End of the year Benchmark data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the academic programming informed by the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, Quality Review Data, and School Survey, we identified the supportive environment element of the Framework for Great Schools as an area of continued focus as it is our goal to ensure that we maintain a supportive environment in our community for all scholars and families. Based on the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, 94% of teachers responded positively to questions about supportive environment. 86% of teachers say that adults at the school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 290Q will build a cohesive plan for social and emotional well-being focused on building scholar and faculty capacity through mentor-ships, through the implementation of scholar council, safety patrols, and collaborations with PS 277. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Scholars from safety patrol will become mentors for P.S. 277 scholars. ELLs, SWDs, Lowest-third Sept-Nov PreK-5 th Sept-June  Promoting safety through modeled behavior.  Have safety patrol scholars document their journey – Google Docs Student council can have agendas outlining goals. Student council having roles:    President Secretary   Note taker (minute keeper)  All student council scholars document their journey – Google Docs Dec-March April-June Instructional Leaders, Coaches, Teachers, Mentors, Paraprofessionals, Counselors, Speech Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, funds and resources will be allocated to ensuring that scholars are equipped with necessary resources. Teachers will have access to technology resources to support in the implementation of instructional programs as well as time embedded in their instructional day to collaborate with teacher team members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As part of P.S. 290Q’s continuous improvement planning, surveys will be administered throughout the year to determine progress towards our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher, parent, and scholar surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the academic programming informed by the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, Quality Review Data, and School Survey, we identified the collaborative teachers element of the Framework for Great Schools as an area of continued focus as it is our goal to ensure that we maintain a collaborative environment. Based on the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, 96% of teachers responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers. 80% of teachers say that their professional development experiences have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. As such, our goal seeks to stream-line the professional development cycles and include opportunities for reflection, peer-feedback, and collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 290Q will focus on improving the professional development cycles by incorporating more opportunities for inter-visitations, modeling, coaching, and common planning sessions as evidenced by teacher exit surveys. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lesson Studies   Common preps along with Common Planning.  Visit Showcase Schools  Modeling Lessons  Coaching Cycles  Content – Based Vertical Meetings  Teacher-Led PD Cycles PreK-5 th Sept-June ELLs, SWDs, Lowest-third Sept-Nov Dec-March April-June Instructional Leaders, Coaches, Teachers, Mentors, Paraprofessionals, Counselors, Speech Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, funds and resources will be allocated to ensuring that scholars are equipped with necessary resources. Teachers will have access to technology resources to support in the implementation of instructional programs as well as time embedded in their instructional day to collaborate with teacher team members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  As part of P.S. 290Q’s continuous improvement planning, surveys will be administered throughout the year to determine progress towards our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher exit surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the academic programming informed by the Framework for Great Schools 2017 Report, Quality Review Data, and School-Wide Data, the following areas of need were identified for the effective school leadership element of the Framework for Great Schools: instructional leaders will continue to support teachers with program coherence and aligning instructional materials across grades and subjects. Based on our Quality Review feedback, instructional leaders will continue to evaluate and reflect on school wide level decisions to further increase coherence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 290Q will focus on clear expectations, timely feedback, and boosting community morale as evidenced by teacher surveys. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers are able to schedule conferences, follow-ups Teachers of Sept-June general meetings online at anytime  Written and verbal feedback from both informal and PreK-5 th formal observations.  Weekly Bulletin email  Planner deadlines   Boosting Morale – Teacher leadership PD, Team building Interactive notebooks ELLs, SWDs, Lowest-third Instructional Leaders, Coaches, Teachers, Mentors, Paraprofessionals, Counselors, Speech Teachers  Professional Development Floater (liaison for communication) head people for each team: School Leadership Team   Envisioning Team    Email staff about Community Updates  Have meetings with grade representatives monthly. Student council Safety Patrol 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, funds and resources will be allocated to support teachers with their professional development and empower parents to actively participate in the school community. Per-session funds will be allocated for the purposes of professional development and resources will be acquired for professional development cycles, including books and other materials/resources. Additionally, we will allocate resources to provide parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The P.S. 290Q community will conduct mid-year conferences with individual teachers where they will reflect on observations, coaching cycles, as well as professional development in connection with the teacher’s professional goals and scholar achievement data in order to progress monitor goal efficacy. Teachers will be able to receive timely actionable feedback to improve their practice and to monitor their progress along the Danielson Framework continuum. By February 2019, instructional leaders will conduct at least 2-4 formative classroom observations, provide all teachers with formative feedback aligned to the Danielson Framework, and provide differentiated professional development in the forms of Coaching Cycles, Inter-visitation, Book Clubs, Mentoring, Lesson Studies and Peer Feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measure of Teacher Practice Reports and teacher surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the academic programming informed by the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, Quality Review Data, School-Wide Data, School Leadership Team (SLT) recommendations, and parent attendance reports, the following goals were identified for the strong family and community ties element of the Framework for Great Schools, the P.S. 290Q community will work to collaborate with community-based organizations to foster partnerships to advance scholar achievement and participation in the community as well as increase the percentage of parents and families attending school-wide events to promote a culture of mutual trust and collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 290Q will focus on building community by making at least 3 partnerships with Community-Based Organizations to foster collaboration and support as evidenced by event sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Ridgewood Kids  Disney Grant  Queens Theatre   Event held at school for CBOs to participate in. Invite CBO to attend PTA meeting Parents/Families, Teachers, CBOs Sept-June PTA, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, School effectiveness Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal, resources will be allocated for per session to the School Effectiveness Team meetings and events. Resources will be allocated to provide parents and families with workshops and events that will promote their continued collaboration to improve scholar achievement in the content areas including educational materials and programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The P.S. 290Q community will analyze attendance trends, event feedback, CBO event feedback with the School Leadership and Effectiveness Teams to determine next-steps towards continuing to meet our goal by February as a mid-year checkpoint. By February 2019, we will engage parents and community based organizations as an integral 2018-19 CEP 26  part of our community as evidenced by at least 80% of parents participating in a variety of events, including but not limited to, PTA meetings, school community events, and conferences and by securing at least 2 partnerships with Community-Based Organizations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheet and participant surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State test scores, Baseline CCLS assessments, F&P reading levels, and initial writing tasks State test scores, Baseline CCLS assessments, and pre- and post tests State test scores, Baseline CCLS assessments, and pre- and post tests Baseline and mid-year assessments, pre and post assessment data Scholar anecdotal notes, parent requests, teacher observations, infraction reports Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Interactive Writing, Foundational Skill Development, Speaking and Listening Activities Guided Math, Dreambox, Foundational Skills, and Problem Solving Guided Reading Informational texts, shared reading, vocabulary instruction Guided Reading Informational texts, shared reading, vocabulary instruction Small group, one-to-one Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one and tutoring During the school day Small group, one-to-one and tutoring During the school day Small group, one-to-one and tutoring During the school day Small group, one-to-one and tutoring During the school day Small group, one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Currently we have 27 scholars in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29 In order to support our scholars we will be supplying them with schools supplies, uniforms, and access to after school programs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 10,075 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Some effective recruitment strategies are: encouraging referrals; arranging for group interaction during the interview; demonstrating interest if you want the candidate to join your team; looking for talent in likely and unlikely places; making yourself stand-out in all areas, where possible; make candidates clear about what differentiates your team/school from other places; share what is unique about your scholars and community; create a warm, welcoming and inviting environment and interview process; and be patient and positive, knowing that the right candidate will come! Some effective retention practices include: career development opportunities; regular feedback on progress; recognition for contributions to the community; flexibility with the implementation of tasks; clear expectations; opportunities to share ideas and consensus building; make work fun; and be fair and honest. High quality professional development is best when it is specialized, personalized and there are opportunities to choose the activity, topic and method of delivery based on data. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At our school, teachers and paraprofessionals can participate in various types of professional development, including but not limited to, coaching cycles, inter-visitation, modeling, peer-coaching, observation and feedback cycles, professional articles, book clubs, conferences, videos/podcasts, lesson study, team teaching, lesson co-planning, reflection, etc. In addition, teachers meet regularly in grade and vertical teams where they review scholar work and adjust their plans accordingly to ensure academic rigor, CCLS alignment and instruction that is differentiated and individualized. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 2018-19 CEP 32  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 33   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. A.C.E. Academy for Scholars P.S. 290, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students A.C.E. Academy for Scholars P.S. 290 will support parents and families of Title I scholars by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 35  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and scholars with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating scholars, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, scholar proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their scholar academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 36  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and scholar progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) A.C.E Academy for Scholars, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of scholars participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual scholar assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for scholars and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Scholar Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: A.C.E. Academy for Scholars This school is (check one): DBN: 24Q290 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 40  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We are using the direct instructional program to provide additional, intensive literacy support for our ELLs in Kindergarten through Fourth Grade. Scholars were chosen based on NYSESLAT and LAB-R scores, as well as our beginning of the year curriculum assessment data and DIBELS We currently have 42 ELL"s in grades Kindergarten through Fifth; 5 of which are Beginning ELL's. Our ELL Achievement program will run from January 9, 2019 through May 12, 2019. The sessions will focus on speaking and listening and reading and writing skills because our targeted scholars did not perform well on these portions of the NYSESLAT relative to their peers. The teachers will use Fontas and Pinnel running records, Words Their Way assessment data and DIBELS to help drive personalized instruction. In writing, the teacher will focus on Information writing, aligned with Citywide Instructional Expectations. The teacher will use a teachers made CCLS-aligned Information writing rubric to assess scholars on-demand writing and tailor lesson objectives to meet the needs of individual scholars. The program will take place two days per week (Wednesday and Thursday) from 2:30-4:00pm. One teacher will work with our Kindergarten and first grade scholars, the second teacher will work with our second and first grade scholars and the third teacher will work with the fourth and fifth grade scholars. The program will begin on January 7, 2019 through May 14, 2019 for a total of 15 weeks which is 30 sessions. Scholars will be grouped in grade bands (Kindergarten only, first and second, third and fourth). The Kindergarten and first grade group will focus on speaking and listening skills as well as vocabulary development. The second and third grade group will emphasize reading and writing skills with and emphasis on sentence fluency and word choice, and the fourth and fifth grade group will focus on reading and writing skills with and emphasis on sentence fluency, word choice and organization. The language of instruction will be English. There will be three teachers who are ESL or Bilingual certified. The teachers will utilize the school's curriculum resources and materials from various programs like Journeys, Fundations, and Words Their Way. In addition, the teachers will utilize the school's computer lab in order to access online resources, including Raz-kids and MYon. Additional guided reading sets will be purchased to support reading instruction. Lastly, scholars will use picture cards and other teachers made materials that will provide our beginner ELLs access to the general education curriculum and promote scholar mastery. 2018-19 CEP 41  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Each year we provide differentiated professional development in order to meet the needs of our individual teachers. As a school community, teachers receive professional development using the Danielson rubric, specifically indicators 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction; 3B: Questioning and Discussion Technqiues; and 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. In addition, our ENL Teacher will receive professional development around 1C: Setting Instructional Outcomes and 2B: Establishing a Culture for Learning so that scholars internalize expectations. Our ENL teacher (Ms. Nelson) will be attending a professional development workshop, which will further her knowledge on planning instruction to support ELL Achievement through CCLS-Aligned Instruction. The dates of the Professional Development workshop are: November 23, December 14 and January 25. The topics covered will include: • Implementation of the CCLS and the adaptation of performance tasks for English language learners will be emphasized through the examination of curriculum, assessment, and classroom instruction to strengthen student work. • Accelerating academic language acquisition for ELLs across the content areas, including sharing and exploring best practices and scaffolding techniques for ELLs to support the development of academic language in content area instruction. On January 18, 2019 Ms. Nelson will turnkey the information from the November 23, and December 14 PD to the other ENL ELL Achievement teachers. Rationale: Ms. Nelson will have the opportunity to learn about how to adapt performance tasks as well as best practices for scaffolding oral language for ELLs. She will then turnkey the information to the ELL Achievement teachers so that they can collaboratively develop a shared understanding of how vocabulary development supports scholar performance on performance tasks. They will also participate in shared research on the development of oral language so that they can support the scholars with the same oral language development during the program and across activities. Topics Covered: Adapting performance tasks for ELLs and oral language development Schedule: January 4, January 11, January 19 and January 25, 2017 2:30p-4:00p Provider: Ms. Nelson (ENL Coordinator) Audience: 2 ELL Achievement teachers Rationale: Our ELL Achievement Teachers will participate in a PLC where they attend an online course from Stanford University delving deeply into academic vocabulary, scholars 2018-19 CEP 42  Part C: Professional Development accessing complex texts and critiquing the reasoning of others. Teachers will then discuss ways they can leverage their learning to implement strategies in the ELL Achievement Program. Topics Covered: academic vocabulary, supporting ELL's with complex texts and critiquing the reasoning of others Audience: 3 ELL Achievement Teacher Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We surveyed families and at the beginning of the year and they stated they would like additional strategies to support their scholar at home. Our goal is to provide parents with the strategies and support they need to propel our scholar's achievement. We plan to have a parent orientation on December 13, 2018 (during a previously planned event) for all families who have a scholar involved in our ELL Achievement program. Our Parent Coordinator will work in tandum with our ENL Coordinator to provide families with information about the program, as well as strategies that will support scholars with homework and school work. Parents will have the opportunity to engage in activities with their children with the support of our ENL Coordinator. Topic 1: Ell Achievement Program Orientation Rationale: Support and develop English language acquisition (reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills) Date: January 5th Time: 2:30pm Name of Provider: Ms. Nelson Audience: All ELL families Topic 2: Ell Achievement Program NYSESLAT Information Session Rationale: Information regarding the NYSESLAT Date: , March 15th Time: 2:30pm Name of Provider: Ms. Nelson Audience: All ELL families Topic 3: Ell Achievement Program Preparing for Summer and End of Program Celebration Rationale: Information regarding resources for the summer vacation Date: May 17th Time: 2:30pm Name of Provider: Ms. Nelson Audience: All ELL families 2018-19 CEP 43  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The ENL teacher will have a conference session with each parent, outlining the current level of performance of the scholar, as well as clearly delineating next steps to help their scholar succeed. In addition, we will invite families in for trimester celebrations, where scholars will present and celebrate their work. Families will be notified of the aforementioned activities with written notices, translated in their native language. In addition, families will receive phone calls from our automated telephone system, also in their native language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $6, 953.85 $626.10 $1545.30 Purchased services  High quality staff N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplemental Program for Scholars: 30 sessions x 1.5 hours x 3 teachers x 51.51 = $6,953.85 Parental Engagement: 3 sessions x 2 hours x 1 teacher x 51.51 = 309.06 and 3 sessions x 2 hours x 1 administrator x 52. 84 = 317.04 Supplemental Program for Scholars professional development : 5 sessions x 2 hours x 3 teachers x 51.51 = $1545.30 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $3,166.00 Guided Reading Texts (A-S) N/A N/A $74.75 Refreshments for parent events 2018-19 CEP 44  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $12,366 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name A.C.E. Academy for Scholars Borough select one School Number 290 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jose Jimenez Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tishana Nelson Teacher/Subject Area Margarita Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area Gilian Banilower Related-Service Provider Michelle Dworetsky Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Jacqueline Bruno Coach N/A School Counselor Donna Gore Parent Linda B Parent Coordinator JoAnn Lawson Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 520 2018-19 CEP 46 Total number of ELLs 37 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.12%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At A.C.E. Academy for scholars we use Fountas and Pinnell formative Assessments to track the progress of our English Language Learners on literacy skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Scholars are tested throughout the year. There are three main benchmarks and then scholars are also tested as needed as they demonstrate progress towards the next level. We have monthly data meetings to analyze trends in running records for ELLs and determine strategies to meet their needs in guided reading. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 47  We use the city's Performance Tasks for both ELA and Math, the ELL periodic assessment, and our own in-house common core aligned assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After summative data has been gathered, teachers use the data to inform their guided reading and guided math groups. Additionally, scholars receive AIS services if they are struggling below two grade levels. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide every instructional decision for all scholars. We specifically track the ELL population across subject areas to ensure that adequate progress is made throughout the year. Teachers begin the year by administering a variety of baseline assessments and screening tools. In Literacy, teachers use the Journeys diagnostic, Fountas and Pinnell, and writing on-demands to determine the entering levels of scholars. Teachers utilize this information to differentiate instruction at the tier 1 level during Literacy. Teachers also utilize this information to determine the skills and strategies they need to use for tier 2 interventions during the daily intervention/enrichment periods and extended day periods twice per week. If scholars are not making adequate progress based on running records, writing tasks, and Journeys unit assessments, then they become eligible for tier 3 Academic Intervention services, which is a pull out service that uses a small group setting to intensely recover reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. The ENL teacher meets with teachers throughout the year to discuss scholar progress and areas of need. They share materials and teaching points as needed to support specific scholars 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by routinely and systematically analyzing scholar work and assessment results. Each grade follows a yearly assessment calendar. The administration reviews the assessment data within one week of its completion date. During the review and analysis, we specifically view the performance of all ELL scholars compared to their general education peers. Administration and teachers reflect on the teaching strategies that were most effective and those that were not after each unit when we annotate scholar work and determine the implications for instruction. Additionally, we compare the NYSESLAT results to previous years NYSESLAT scores, as well as NYSITELL results for incoming scholars, to determine whether or not scholars are making progress from year to year. The NYSESLAT results are also analyzed based on modality and the areas of need, then including those specific targets in the day to day instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers regularly meet to analyze data trends and inform their instruction based on assessment results. As a leadership cabinet, we discuss the areas of need and make professional development decisions to inform our teacher and scholar needs. Teachers create and revise lessons based on the needs of their scholars and address the particular language and content needs of ELLs. The ENL teacher also gives the teachers a snapshot at the start of the school year to share the ELL levels and specific modality need. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 48  In our ENL program, scholars receive push-in instruction from their ENL teacher in a heterogeneous grouping. Scholars that are classified as Entering or Emerging receive 4 blocks of pull-out services and 4 blocks of push-in. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Ms. Nelson is a certified ENL teacher and is also our ELL coordinator. Ms. Nelson and the principal, create a schedule that ensures all ELL scholars receive the mandated instructional minutes using push-in and pullout services. The Entering and Emerging ELL scholars receive 360 minutes of ENL services (180 minutes stand-alone model plus 180 minutes integrate), while the Transitioning and Expanding ELL scholars receive 180 minutes of ENL services in the content area. Commanding scholars received 90 minutes of integrated ENL services in the content area. Additionally, the ENL teacher has sufficient room in their schedule to ensure that our scholars will receive the continuing 90 minute service using the aforementioned push-in model. Ms. Nelson collaborates with classroom teachers in planning lessons and setting individual ENL goals. Nearly all of Ms. Nelson's push-in periods take place during the literacy block, in order to help ensure scholars have the support they need to acquire these skills. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a school we use a personalized approach to planning and instruction. As a result, teachers plan mini-lessons and activities that incorporate scholars' skills, knowledge, language, interests, and cultural heritage. In addition, teachers encourage scholar discourse throughout the lesson, and scholars may communicate with another scholar in their native language. We support scholars with native language development through the use of bilingual dictionaries and texts as well as the use of cognates. The ENL instruction also includes prompts for speaking and discussing, and opportunities to interact with various texts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our only program is ENL. With that in mind, we support our scholars with native language support through the use of resources such as: In ELA we use adaptive technology, bilingual texts and dictionaries, FUNdations tiles and letter boards. In math, teachers use various adaptive technology (Dreambox) learning to meet scholars at their current proficiency levels as well as small group instruction. Additionally, teachers use various visual and manipulative support for scholars in the various stages of language acquisition. In the science content, teachers deliver science content is delivered via a centers-based model so scholars have various opportunities to experience content in a hands-on manner. All content data is compiled and aggregated to measure scholar progress across content areas. Additionally, we administer periodic assessments to measure scholar progress across content areas and against the CCLS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not have any SIFE scholars. If in the future we have SIFE scholars they will receive three periods per week of AIS, as well as Title III after school programs where scholars will receive targeted English instruction with native language support. Additionally, we would use parent-engagement time to support scholars with their acquisition of the four modalities of English. b. We use diagnostic data, Interim assessments, and classroom assessments to ensure that all scholars are meeting expectations. In addition to academic data, we also use an advisory Character Development Program that assesses scholar 2018-19 CEP 49  behaviors. Through this small group program and teacher observations, we will be able to identify scholars having difficulty with adjusting to the new environment. Lastly, teachers use varied methods of instruction and allow sufficient time for scholars to respond and answer questions. c. We plan to use the NYSESLAT and classroom assessment results to determine each scholar's individual needs. This past year, we noticed a trend in this group that demonstrated a difficulty in writing and speaking and listening. As a result, we programmed our ENL teacher to push-in during the writing period each day to support scholars in these areas. Furthermore, each of these scholars will be invited and encouraged to participate in our ELL Achievement after school program. We will continue to track and monitor the progress of all eight scholars on school-based assessments throughout the year to ensure that we are closing the gaps and preparing them to achieve proficient levels. d. In our fourth year of Kindergarten, First Grade, Second Grade, and Third Grade we do not have any Long-Term ELLs. e. We closely monitor and track the progress of all scholars, paying special attention to ELLs, SWDs, and special populations. Based on their assessment data, we determine if scholars need any additional support, such as Extended Day or AIS to ensure that they do not fall behind and maintain their upward trajectory. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our plan for ELLs identified as scholars with disabilities will incorporate many of the differentiated instructional strategies that all of our ELLs will receive. In addition to the ENL program, we will also use the scholars' IEPs to deliver a personalized ENL approach. We also use our budget to pay for alternate placement paraprofessionals who translate instruction into the scholars' native language. One instructional strategy that teachers use is interactive books on promethean board, read along books, adaptive technology such as Raz-Kids and MyOn. Scholars at different sub-group levels receive guided reading at various levels such as novels and texts that are culturally responsive and relevant including many cognates to transfer knowledge of their language as they learn English. Other native language materials are used such as bilingual dictionaries and books, cognate anchor charts, print and audio CDs. Some instructional strategies for ELLs include but are not limited to: small group instruction, interactive activities, individual conferences, differentiated graphic organizers to support language development and peer partnering. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses Common Core Learning Standards-aligned curriculum in Math and Literacy. Our Math program presents topics in a varied approach, using concrete, pictorial, and abstract presentations. Our balanced literacy program strengthens scholars' skills in comprehension, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, grammar, and writing. This program is also supplemented by Fundations for scholars who may need additional support. Teachers differentiate the curriculum based on the needs of each scholar, consistently incorporating multi-objective and small group lesson plans. Our scheduling allows common planning time for teachers to adjust unit plans and assessments to best fit the needs of all learners. In addition, our schedule creates an inclusive environment where all scholars participate in enrichment courses, including Arts and Sciences, Global Connections, Character Development, Health and Physical Education, and Technology. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention programs begin by assessing where scholars are struggling. In ELA, we use Fundations to support phonological/phonemic awareness, phonics and spelling. The ELA Journeys curriculum also includes an intervention component for scholars having difficulty with comprehension. In Math and other content areas, we use small group instruction to recover gaps in the assessment data. Within small groups, ELLs are supported by visual representations, manipulatives, teacher modeling, kinesthetic activities and summarizing of key points. This year, we will also add our ELL Achievement program, which is an after school program that takes place two times per week. We will continue the program in the 2018-2019 school year. This program will use a combination of Words Their Way, Fundations, and guided reading. Our social studies curriculum is an integrated approach via global literacy so scholars have the opportunity to delve deeply into topics through both fiction and non-fiction texts. In math, teachers use various adaptive technology learning to meet scholars at their current proficiency levels as well as small group instruction. Additionally, teachers use various visual and manipulative 2018-19 CEP 50  support for scholars in the various stages of language acquisition. In the science content, teachers deliver science content is delivered via a centers-based model so scholars have various opportunities to experience content in a hands-on manner. All content data is compiled and aggregated to measure scholar progress across content areas. Additionally, we administer periodic assessments to measure scholar progress across content areas and against the CCLS. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2018-2019 school year, we will offer strategic grouping of extended services and leverage the growth across modalities. Additionally, we will continue to use the NYC ELL Periodic Assessment to deliver targeted and differentiated instruction to all scholars across the four domains of language acquisition by the ENL service providers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We believe in an inclusive educational approach. Therefore, ELLs have equal access to all school programs. Scholars are invited via written invitations and permission slips. All scholars at our school receive Reading, Writing, Math, Global Connections, Arts and Sciences, Character Development, Health and Physical Education, Technology, Music, and Visual Arts. All scholars are invited to participate in our Maspeth Town Hall After School Program. Furthermore, we use a push-in model to ensure that scholars are not missing any instruction that their peers may be receiving. We use translation services for homework assignments, notices for families, key instructional concepts, and parent conferences. In addition, we invite all ELLs to participate in our extended day program, which is broken up into small groups that focus on specific literacy skills and concepts. The goal of the program is to develop proficient listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills for each scholar. Based on scholar data collected and aggregated we reach out to families of individual scholars and encourage them to attend after school programs such as Maspeth Town Hall, Scholar Academy and Title III after school. ELLs are represented in all programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers use graphic organizers, word walls, process charts, pictorial support, manipulatives, and translated materials to ensure that every child has access to the delivered content. Teachers use technology like document readers and smart boards to enhance the visual support for scholars. Teachers also use listening centers to enrich language development. We do offer texts in Spanish for families who do not understand any English. One instructional strategy that teachers use is interactive books on promethean board, read along books, adaptive technology such as Raz-Kids,Lexia, MyOn learning. Scholars at different sub-group levels receive guided reading at various levels such as novels and texts that are culturally responsive and relevant including many cognates to transfer knowledge of their language as they learn English. Other native language materials are used such as bilingual dictionaries and books, cognate anchor charts, print and audio CDs. Some instructional strategies for ELLs include but are not limited to: small group instruction, visual depictions, individual conferences, differentiated graphic organizers to support language development and peer partnering. Additionally, math content is translated so that scholars who are still acquiring English can access content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our only program is ENL. With that in mind, we support our scholars with native language support through the use of resources such as: In ELA we use adaptive technology, bilingual texts and dictionaries, FUNdations tiles and letter boards. In math, teachers use various adaptive technology learning to meet scholars at their current proficiency levels as well as small group instruction. Additionally, teachers use various visual and manipulative support for scholars in the various stages of language acquisition. In the science content, teachers deliver science content is delivered via a centers-based model so scholars have various opportunities to experience content in a hands-on manner. All content data is compiled and aggregated system to measure scholar progress across content areas. Additionally, we administer periodic assessments to measure scholar progress across content areas and against the CCLS. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 51  All services, support, and resources correspond to our scholars' age and grade level, K, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.The number of ENL Service periods meets the needs of our ELL scholars. The classroom libraries, technology, and materials correspond to our ELLs ages, interests, and grade. We use texts that have high interest but low readability to support ELL and IEP scholars in guided reading. Additionally, scholars have access to adaptive technology across content areas that is engaging while simultaneously cognitively and age appropriate with regard to content. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Ms. Nelson, works with the students in the Inclusion Revolution program and supports them in the general education classrooms with sharing visual activities, modified homework packets and the materials needed for the other scholars in the ENL program. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Some of the activities the school uses to assist newly enrolled ELL scholars before the beginning of the school year include the opportunity to visit the school before it opens and a translated family newsletter that includes a supply list and tips for getting your child ready for his/her first day of school. In addition, our bilingual school aide gives tours of the school for all families. ELL scholars who enroll after the beginning of the year also receive a parent orientation and tours are available upon request. The ELLs who enroll during the school year are met by the ENL teacher on their first or second day of school and she makes contact with parents at drop off, arrival or dismissal. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We host an after school Mandarin program for scholars interested in learning a foreign language. Presently, we only serve Kindergarten through fifth grades, so there are no language electives offered to any students at this time during the school day. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teacher, Ms. Nelson will be registered for a full day development course once a month at the Queens Division of English Language Learners Professional Development of ENL teachers. These courses are dedicated to language acquisition, best practices, and integrating language and content instruction. These PDs support teachers in delivering Common Core-aligned instruction by incorporating the aforementioned methods to support ELLs in the classroom setting by learning how to identify the immediate needs of ELLs (mastery aligned to CCLS objectives) and developing and implementing ENL strategies to provide scaffolding in the content areas (ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). Additionally, during the Other Professional Responsibilities time all teachers will be offered a development course focused on supports for English Language Learners, facilitated by our ENL coordinator Ms. Nelson. Participants will learn and apply high leverage ELL strategies to support scholars during whole group and small group lessons by engaging in sessions that will focus 2018-19 CEP 52  on language and vocabulary acquisition, comprehension, Total-Physical Response, and scaffolded writing methods. English as a new language teachers, professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Additionally, Ms. Nelson will be facilitating a four-session professional development during our Other Professional Responsibilities time. Ms. Nelson will cover the application of high leverage strategies to support ELL scholars during whole group and small group lessons by engaging in sessions that will focus on language and vocabulary acquisition, comprehension, Total-Physical Response and scaffolded writing methods. This Professional Development opportunity will be open to: assistant principals, common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational and physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries and the parent coordinator. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During our monthly Professional Development meetings, we will focus primarily on questioning and discussion techniques and designing coherent instruction. In order to meet the needs of our scholar population, a great deal of time will be spent specifically on ELL instructional strategies. In addition, teachers will also be given professional literature about teaching ELL scholars. We also have a common planning block where grade teams meet for 45 minutes weekly. This allows teachers to share best practices and for the administration to provide professional development responsive to the needs of the school community. Furthermore, our administration will support classroom teachers with ENL strategies during observations and conferences. Finally, our secretary and school aides receive direct professional development from the principal in regards to communicating with families. Teachers have the opportunity to attend a variety of professional development workshops that support all scholars with engaging in the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition to the workshop attended by the ENL teachers, general education and special education teachers of ELLs are also attending an ELA and Math series. Furthermore, teachers receive specific and actionable feedback on unit plans and tasks aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards, which will ensure scholars are prepared for college and career. All documents are maintained digitally on our A.C.E. Academy OneDrive files and agendas are kept in a Meetings Binder which Ms. Nelson maintains and the administrative team has access to. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL provider will schedule to meet with individual parents or guardians during the Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement time, to discuss goals of the ENL program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. A qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands will be provided at this meeting. Ms. Nelson will also send home mandatory ENL letters and make appointments to share results and home strategies with families. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We are an inclusive community, and parents are an integral part of it. Starting at registration, parents are invited and encouraged to be active members of the community. Parents of EL's are invited to an Orientation where they are given all of their program options.In order to be responsive to our parents,we chose to have Freestanding ENL program because the majority of our families selected this option. All families are invited to a Family BBQ at the beginning of the school year, where they have the opportunity to meet the teachers and other families. Our school has a very active Parent Teacher Association and PTA President. All parents are invited to participate in classroom activities like read-alouds, class celebration, and field 2018-19 CEP 53  trips. Our PTA involves parent volunteers by encouraging them to participate in committees for language,school beautification, grant writing, and technology support. Our school aide is bilingual in English and Spanish, so she is able to respond to questions of most of our families. Teachers call and write home regularly to keep parents informed of their child's classroom performance through Class DOJO and Remind. We use NYC Department of Education translation services when necessary. Ms. Nelson also conducts several workshops and events for parents throughout the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jose Luis Jimenez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: A.C.E. Academy for Scholars School DBN: 24Q290 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jose Jimenez Title Principal Jacqueline Bruno Assistant Principal JoAnn Lawson Parent Coordinator Tishana Nelson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Linda B Parent Gilian Banilower Teacher/Subject Area Margarita Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Donna Gore School Counselor Madelene Chan N/A Michelle Dworetsky N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Related Services Provider Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/30 08/30 08/30 08/30 08/30 08/30 08/30 N/A N/A 08/30 08/30 N/A 08/30 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q290 School Name: A.C.E. Academy for Scholars Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each year we create a database organized by class based on ATS, HILS and Scholar Blue Cards to track the languages families speak. We then update the database three times annually as well as when new scholars are enrolled. The database tracks families' oral and written languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, Arabic, Polish, Russian 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Family Handbook (September) Monthly Newsletters Weekly homework sheets Field Trip Permission Slips Schoolwide announcements Progress Reports and Report Cards (October, November, March, and May) After-school Enrichment offerings and information Two weeks before all of the aforementioned documents are sent home, we survey parents in writing and via robo call to determine if they require translated documents. If they are in need then we utilize the NYCDOE translation unit to translate the documents for parents. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? September Meet the Teacher Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences in November, March and May, Monthly PTA meetings, Monthly Principal's Breakfast, Mother's Day and Father's Day Breakfasts, Family BBQ in September, Winter Wonderland in Decembr. Weekly outreach during Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. Two weeks before all of the aforementioned documents are sent home, we survey parents in writing and via robo call to determine if they require translated documents. If they are in need then we utilize the NYCDOE translation unit to translate the documents for parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Two weeks before all of the aforementioned events and meetings, we survey parents in writing and via robo call to determine if they require translated documents and/or translation services. If they are in need then we utilize the NYCDOE translation unit to translate the documents for parents. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator sends out surveys bi-annually to assess the interests and needs of families and then at the end of the year to measure satisfaction with the aforementioned. We then create goals and action plans based on family feedback. Additionally, at our May Principal's breakfast we will create a committee to serve as a focus group to meet to discuss glows and grows for the year connected to the translation services. We also provide translation during the focus group's meeting. 2018-19 CEP 60 
