2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q295 School Name: P.S./I.S. 295 Principal: DEON LAVIGNE-JONES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 295 342900010295 Pre-k-8 School Number (DBN): 29Q295 222-14 Jamaica Avenue, Queens Village, NY 11428 718-464-1433 718-464-1439 Fax: Email Address: mcody3@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: Melissa Cody School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Deon LaVigne-Jones Colleen Chiauzzi Christine Smith Deon LaVigne-Jones SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Christine Smith N/A Frederick Salomon District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191 Street, Room 122, Hollis, New York 11423 bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 217-7740 Ext. 1222 718 217-7739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5868 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frederick Salomon CBO Representative, if applicable Michelle Kraus Nicole Jonas Marsha Joseph Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Deon LaVigne-Jones Colleen Chiauzzi Christine Smith Mercedes Barnes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Raven Rodriguez Josephine Quinones NadiraBachan Shawn Yon Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  PS/ IS 295 Queens provides opportunities for students to achieve their educational excellence, become responsible and respectful citizens; to embrace lifelong learning in a safe and positive environment through teamwork within the school community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. /I.S. 295Q is an elementary-middle school with 521 students from PreK through grade 8, located in Queens Village, New York. The current population is comprised of 32% Hispanic, 34 % Asian, 23% Black, 5% American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 4% White. English Language Learners account for 11% and Students with Disabilities account for 17%. The attendance rate to date is 91%. Our emphasis on literacy and mathematics includes a school wide involvement with Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Initiative and Go Math! curriculum. Our goal is to provide maximum educational opportunities for all of our students. Students are encouraged to participate in extra-curricular activities while being challenged in various advanced classes in Mathematics and English. PS/IS 295Q offers a diverse learning community with engaged faculty. Our classroom environment offers technology including laptop computers and interactive whiteboards in every classroom and interactive tables. Instructional strategies incorporate hands on exploration and inquiry based learning. Some of the special initiatives we are implementing are: Career Day: Our annual Career Day creates a critical link between the classroom and the community workplace by allowing students to explore various career options so that they can make informed educational and career choices. Career Day allows students to gain exposure to different careers. Presenters discuss how English, math, problem solving, teamwork, and other basic skills learned in the classroom are used on the job. Student ambassadors create in-depth research projects on a chosen career and present those projects to peers, faculty, parents and adult presenters. Performances: Monthly ceremonies are held to celebrate student success. During these ceremonies students are presented awards in honor roll, most improved student of the month, student of the month and attendance. Throughout the school year all classes participate in assembly performances. School performances include topics on bullying, black history and multiculturalism. National Junior Honor Society: NJHS honors those students who have demonstrated excellence in the areas of school leadership, service and character. In addition to recognizing students for their accomplishments. NJHS also challenges them to be involved in school activities and community service. Student Council: 2018-19 CEP 10  Leadership skills are honed in student government. Each grade has two student representatives to help plan events and engage in discussion about school policies. Students take leadership roles in fundraising and service projects throughout the school year. Choice Clubs: Students can select a range of choice from peer tutoring, technology club, yearbook, chess club, art, band and Spanish club. Collaboration: Grade wide teacher teams meet regularly to examine student work, reflect on teaching and share best practices. Teachers regularly collaborate with parents to share information on how to support the school’s efforts. Grade-wide monthly newsletters are created by teachers giving parents specific information about the class/grade. Parent Workshops: Parent workshops are conducted monthly by Administration, Parent Coordinator, and Teachers. Parents are invited to come in and participate in a learning session for their child’s grade level. Parents are also invited to sit in on classes to really get a feel for their child’s day. Our area of focus is to align use of resources to support instructional goals to meet students’ needs. Our area of celebration is rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula and assessments aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. According to School Progress data ... [see comment] 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners account for 10% and Students with Disabilities account for 15% of our student population. Languages represented include: Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Arabic, Haitian, Punjabi and Albanian. Language Progression by Grade: 1st: Entering-Expanding 2nd: Emerging-Commanding 3rd: Entering-Commanding 4th: Emerging-Commanding 5th: Entering, Transitioning, Expanding 6th: Expanding-Commanding 2018-19 CEP 11  7th: Commanding 8th: Emerging, Expanding-Commanding PS/IS 295 has approximately 80 students with IEPs. The recommended placement ranges from SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Service) to ICT (Instructional Consultant Teacher classes) to self-contained 12:1:1 settings. There are 4 multi-grade 12:1:1 classes and 9 ICT classes, one on each grade level from kindergarten to grade 8. The specific needs of the special student population are small group explicit instruction. Teachers implement a modified, differentiated instruction to meet their individual needs. Many students with IEPs receive related services; such as speech therapy, counseling, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and APE (Adapted Physical Education). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress in the "Collaborative Teachers" aspect of the Framework for Great Schools, moving from a measure of 3.54 to 3.74. Our key focus this year will be on building "Strong Family and Community Ties". According to School Quality Guide data, our score for Strong Family and Community Ties dropped from a 3.29 in 2015-2016 to 2.87 during 2016-2017. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q295 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 496 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 53 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 69.2% % Reduced Lunch 9.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.2% 29.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 27 28 94.7% 7.9% 16.7% 24.0% 36.5% 6.7% 2 20% 8.5 53.4% 75% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths relative to Rigorous Instruction: According to the NYC School Survey, 100% of teachers who responded (88%) said that they had the resources and tools available to support the Common Core shifts in Math instruction. This measure is 8% above both the city and district average. While the teachers feel they have what they need, it is clear that math instruction needs to improve in our school. In addition to the Algebra Regents course we have offered for the past 5 years, we are this year offering Living Environment to our 8th grade students. At the end of the school year, 24 students (40%) of our 8th grade will sit for both the Algebra and Living Environment Regents Exams. 2. Priority needs relative to Rigorous Instruction: Though our teachers responded positively to the survey questions about instruction, the students did less so. In the area of Course Clarity, students answered positively only 74% of the time. This was 4% below the district average and 6% below the city average. Students also answered less positively to the Academic Press questions on the survey than we had hoped. Positive responses overall in this category were at 67%, 3% lower than the district average and 4% lower than the city average. An analysis of the results of our school’s performance on the 2017 Mathematics state exams revealed the need to enhance curriculum and instruction to improve scores and close the achievement gap in this subject area. We have aligned our new curriculum and various end unit assessments and performance tasks to the CCLS. In addition, we are utilizing the data collected from the Performance Series assessments to drive instruction. Multiple sources of 2018-19 CEP 14  performance data, including the performance on the NYS Assessments, reveal that students in the sub group population of Students with Disabilities performed lower than their peers. As evidenced from the 2017 NYS Mathematics NYSED Assessment Data: 12:1:1 Classes ICT Classes Grade Overall Score 3 4 5 6 7 8 .18 points below city average 30% below city average 9 % below city average .09 points above city average 55% below city average 13% above city average .03 points above city average 56% below city average 8% below city average .09 points below city average 35 % below city average 8% below city average .07 points above city average 31% below city average 7% below city average .31 points above city average 22% below city average 42% above city average Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all students including ELL and SWDS will be engaged in math process writing in preparation for the NYS Mathematics standardized examinations as measured by a 5% increase on the Mathematics baseline and end-of year assessments in grades 3-8. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in professional development. Professional Development to include developing curricula using the Universal Design for Learning process, and using CCLS-aligned, grade-specific rubrics (with common categories and point system) as both an instructional and assessment tool. EngageNY.org website will be utilized to support the All students in K- 8 and all teachers Mondays September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, ENL Coordinators, IEP Teacher development of teachers and the sharing of grade level expectations to families at workshops during the school day and Tuesdays Parental Engagement sessions. Teachers with SWD will use the data analysis from the NYS assessment to implement and refine curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards. During grade level and Special Education Team meetings teachers within their grade-level bands will focus on the continual and successful implementation of the common core curriculum. Design and utilize a balanced math prototype that consists of a 80-minute block designed around the workshop model, which includes but is not limited to, problem of the day, mini-lesson, small group instruction, teacher observations, math reflections and/or performance tasks. Mathematics teacher teams will meet regularly to design and edit formative and summative assessment tools in order to constantly review curriculum maps and pacing calendars for revisions. All students in K- 8 and all teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers All students in K- 8 and all teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers All students in K- 8 and all teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Instructional Math Team Leaders Curriculum Development - Grade Bands will be created and available for revisions, as needed. Math Teacher Teams will be in place working on curriculum, student work, and assessments. All students in K- 8 and all teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year from September to June, we will support and engage families in the area of Rigorous Instruction by: Inviting parents to sit in on their child's classes   Conducting Parent Workshops  Communicating with parents via JupiterEd and Class Dojo  Class Newsletters  Monthly Principal "Coffee and Tea With Me" meetings with parents  Monthly PTA Meetings Key personnel involved will include all teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Principal, APs, guidance counselor and deans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All School Staff Members will have access to: I-Ready, SMART Boards, Go Math program, professional learning, common planning, mathematics coach to improve student performance and achievement. A teacher leader has been given time within her weekly teaching schedule to facilitate elementary grade specific math coaching, planning, and inter-visitations, rendering per session minimal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will have shown a 2.5% increase in math achievement as measured and tracked by I-Ready and Go Math mid-year assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Review I-Ready and Go Math! mid-year assessments and Performance Series assessments during three intervals of the school year. Review progress towards meeting the annual goals and make adjustments to the action plan as needed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 2. Priority needs relative to Supportive Environment: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, students Reported below average satisfaction with Personal Attention and Support. We are below both the city and the district in this category.   -5% district -10% city Only 39% of students in grades 6-8 responded positively that; "in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset." 25% of the students report that NO teacher supports them when they are upset. it is especially concerning that in the teacher category that correlates (Social-Emotional), teachers answered positively 93% of the time to questions regarding how they support students. It would be beneficial to see the breakdown of teachers by grade, as the only students who respond to the survey are in grades 6-8, yet all teachers, PreK-8 responded to the survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will be actively engaged in professional learning around student social emotional development delivered by the 100 Schools Project and during professional development sessions across the year to better support our students. This will be evidenced by a 10% increase in the percentage of positive responses to the area of "Personal Attention and Support" on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The 100 Schools Project will observe classroom interaction between students and teachers. All staff Teachers will engage in professional learning around student social emotional growth and needs. All staff September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 To address the needs of students with disabilities, ELL, and other high-need subgroups, in addition to delineated service plans students will receive push in content specific interventions through AIS providers in the mornings when content delivery and instruction occurs. All Students September 2018- June 2019 By November 2018, all staff members will engage in workshops/presentations promoting and training on student social-emotional and physical learning. (SEPL) Staff Guidance Counselor, Deans, and Student Council will plan, implement, and monitor monthly student activities to track participation rates and prepare topics for leadership cabinet review, Staff and students September 2018- November 2018 September 2018- November 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Sharon Weiss (MSW from the Jewish Board) School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Sharon Weiss (MSW from the Jewish Board) School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor, Deans, Student Council How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 19  Throughout the year from September to June, we will support and engage families in the area of Supportive Environment by: Inviting parents to sit in on their child's classes   Conducting Parent Workshops  Communicating with parents via JupiterEd and Class Dojo  Class Newsletters  Monthly Principal "Coffee and Tea With Me" meetings with parents  Monthly PTA Meetings  School Calendars Key personnel involved will include all teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Principal, APs, guidance counselor and deans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The 100 Schools Project supports our school through observations conducted during regular class time; and feedback given by them to the classroom teacher. Teacher Professional learning will occur during regularly scheduled Monday PD time, rendering per session and per diem minimal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in grades 6-8 will respond to the in house survey questions that align with the end of year school survey, to indicate if we are on target for meeting our goal of increasing the indicators by 10% in the area of personal attention and support. The goal is for at least 70% of our students to respond positively to questions of personal attention and support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created student survey mirroring end of year school climate survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths relative to Collaborative Teachers: According to the NYC School Quality Guide, Collaborative Teachers is an area of celebration for our school. On this measure, we scored .32 points higher than of our district schools and .15 points higher than the city average.  In the category of School Commitment, we scored 20% higher than the rest of the district and 18% higher than the city.  100% of teachers responded positively that they would recommend our school to someone seeking a school for their child.  100% of teachers responded positively that they would recommend our school to other teachers as a place to work.  100% of teachers responded positively that they usually look forward to work every day.  86% of teachers responded positively to questions regarding Innovation and collective responsibility. 2. Priority needs relative to Collaborative Teachers: Even though our teachers work closely together in common planning teams by grade and inquiry teams by grade band or subject on the middle school level, there can be more structured collaboration. Our teachers could focus on learn from each other and becoming comfortable with Teacher Rounds protocols and class inter-visitations.  Only 76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of their peers are eager to try new ideas. In an effort to further improve instruction, it is necessary for more of our teams to employ a vertical planning structure. 2018-19 CEP 21  To address especially the math scores referenced in Rigorous Instruction, a vertical math team will be created to help teachers in different grades understand the work that must be done with our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in a Teacher Round or class inter visitation in order to further their professional growth, as evidenced by records of participation and a teacher survey. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year from September to June, we will support and engage families in the area of Teacher Collaboration by: Inviting parents to sit in on their child's classes   Conducting Parent Workshops  Communicating with parents via JupiterEd and Class Dojo  Class Newsletters  Monthly Principal "Coffee and Tea With Me" meetings with parents  Monthly PTA Meetings Key personnel involved will include all teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Principal, APs, guidance counselor and deans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HR: All teachers, Teacher Leaders, Assistant Principal, Principal Program for Grade meetings to take place during school and regular work week schedule, rendering per session and per diem unnecessary.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Surveys will be conducted with teachers in February 2019 to determine usefulness of teacher rounds. Mid-point Monitor: February 2019, administration will gather evidence of meetings via: Team Meeting Agendas and sign in sheets, Logs, feedback from teams highlighted in Team Meeting minutes and other relevant documentation and communication from PD created for and by teacher teams. Evidence should be that all teachers are collaboratively working in their established team. We will continue to employ the 6 week cycles of inquiry. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inter-visitation records and teacher surveys will be utilized to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan using meeting artifact. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths relative to Effective School Leadership: Administration practices distributive leadership effectively, by identifying staff who will step up to leadership positions. Several staff members who have been identified as teacher leaders have begun and some have now finished administrative programs, and are involved in running programs across the school such as:  MSQI  College Access for All  RAAD According to the 2016-2017 NYC School Survey, our score of 3.20 in Effective School Leadership is lower than that of the district by .18) and city by .24.  88% of parents answered positively that they feel included in shared decision making  88% of teachers feel there is program coherence (higher than city and district averages)  87% of teachers answered positively in the area of Instructional Leadership 2. Priority needs relative to Effective School Leadership: According to the 2016-2017 NYC school survey,  76% of teachers responded positively that they have influence in school matters  62% reported that they have a "moderate to great deal of influence over school policy" in developing instructional materials Needs: To improve the leadership development with supervisors, content teachers, and lead teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of 20% of teachers assuming leadership roles, at least 90 % of teachers will respond positively to questions and prompts related to Effective School Leadership, as measured by the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (or School Learning Environment Survey). 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professionally develop, mentor, and monitor assistant principal in the structures and protocols necessary to ensure a healthy school climate and improve pedagogy. Assistant principal Plan and implement professional development opportunities including PLCs for mentors and teacher leaders to improve student performance and to enhance teaching pedagogy. ENL teachers and teachers of students with disabilities will provide PD on differentiation and other learning strategies to all staff. Mentor teacher, Teacher Leaders Teachers September 2018- June 2019 July 2018- June 2019 Principal Principal, Asst. Principal, Teacher Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Asst. Principal, Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year from September to June, we will support and engage families in the area of Rigorous Instruction by: Inviting parents to sit in on their child's classes   Conducting Parent Workshops  Communicating with parents via JupiterEd and Class Dojo  Class Newsletters  Monthly Principal "Coffee and Tea With Me" meetings with parents  Monthly PTA Meetings Key personnel involved will include all teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Principal, APs, guidance counselor and deans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HR: Principal, AP, Teacher Leaders, Superintendent related support personnel Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will meet with teachers who have been identified as leaders to check on their progress.In addition, there should be evidence of teacher leadership development as evidenced by observations, PD documentation, feedback sheets, and walk- throughs. A survey aligned with the end of year measure on the School Learning Environment Survey will be administered to teachers at this time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A survey aligned with the end of year measure on the School Learning Environment Survey will be administered to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths relative to Effective School Leadership: Our school has a PTA and a strong Parent Coordinator. We need to leverage these relationships to involve more parents meaningfully in the school day. According to our 2015-2016 Quality Review, we were Well Developed (4.99) in the area of indicator 3.4: A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations. 2. Priority Needs relative to Effective School Leadership: Areas of need: Moving towards a PTA with an increased parent participation rate, and where teachers take a larger role in the practice of collaborating with parents; more opportunities for parents to visit the school and learn how to help their children succeed. Seeking additional ways for students to bring home school notices to families. According to our Learning Environment Survey from 2016-2017:  61% of parents felt they had been invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction  63% of parents felt invited to volunteer their time to support the school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to regularly communicate with parents through increased family events, 95% of parents will respond positively to questions and prompts related to Communication, as measured by the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey (or 2017-2018 School Quality Guide). 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly "Coffee and Tea" with the Principal. Open forum for parents to meet with the principal. Parents Tuesday Parent Engagement time - parent meetings, workshops and information sessions. Teachers and support staff will available to meet with parents via in-person, on the telephone, or internet on Tuesdays to discuss data, student learning and performance issues. Parents Parent Adult Learning sessions led by teachers in areas of interest to parents' learning. Parents Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, and PTA will host informational workshops for parents on student learning topics: Common Core Learning Standards, Navigating Jupiter Ed (on-line grading system), I-Ready, Our Schools' Website, Specialized High School Exam, Middle School Choice and the High School Articulation Process. Parents, students September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers, School Leaders Teachers, School Leaders, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Teacher Leaders, PTA, Parent Coordinator, Guidance, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SASF, 100 Schools Project Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent Coordinator  PA Executive Board  Principal  Teachers  Assistant Principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 31  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019: a school designed survey mimicking the Learning Environment Survey will be given to parents to measure progress towards attaining our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All Students retained in current grade Teacher Assessments level 2 and below TCRWP Running Record Performance Series Report / pre-mid-post assessments of students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Level II Intervention is scheduled in the classroom by the classroom teacher will differentiate instruction by: ● Small group instruction Small group One to one Tutoring ● I-Ready extension lessons ● Strategy Groups ● ReadyGenTier II support ● Expeditionary LearningTier II strategic support Recommendations from the SBST for AIS services ● Scaffold Strategy Handbook ● Guided Reading Groups ● Zoom In-Curriculum Associates ● Use of graphic organizers and modeling of skills and strategies AIS intervention is 2018-19 CEP 33  Mathematics scheduled as a pull out program services provided by a special education teacher 2X a week, 43 minute periods per week. ● STARS used with I-ready program ● Focus on Reading ● Computer sites ● Use of graphic organizers and modeling of skills and strategies Tier 3- out of classroom Level II Intervention is scheduled in the classroom by the teacher. The classroom teacher will differentiate instruction by: ● Modified Instructional Task ● I-Ready Extension ● Small Group Instruction ● Strategy Groups ● Use of graphic organizers, repetitive instruction and modeling of skill and strategies ● Performance Series ● Tier II intervention strategy kit (Go Math Program) ● Math Connect strategic kit Tier III intervention is scheduled as a pull out program instruction All Students retained in current grade Teacher Assessments level 2 and below Performance Series Report /pre-med-post assessments of the students Recommendations from the SBST for AIS services Small group During School One to one Tutoring After School Programs 2x a week 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Teacher Assessments of level 1 Recommendations from the SBST for AIS services Social Studies Teacher Assessments of level 1 Recommendations from the SBST At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At-risk Guidance services include: crisis interventions, peer mediation, peer-leadership role modeling programs. Classroom instruction implementing reflective practices of appropriate social skills incorporating character provided by a special education teacher 2X a week, 43 minute periods per week. ● Use of Manipulative ● Repetitive Instruction of math skills and strategies ● Tier III Intervention strategy kit (Go Math) AIS intervention is scheduled as a pull out program: ● Scaffold the Instruction ● Modified task ● Graphic organizers Study skill and organizational strategies AISI intervention is scheduled as a push in and pull out program: ● Scaffold instruction with primary and secondary sources ● Graphic organizers Study skill and organizational strategies Method of delivery include but not limited to: individual meetings, family conferences, classroom instruction, group interventions, individual interventions, assembly presentations, peer scaffolding programs, parent presentations/workshops, student workshops, written correspondence Small Group During school hours One to one Small Group During school hours One to one Small group or one to one as required. During school hours with workshops after school hours; as needed. 2018-19 CEP 35  to families. Supports may be utilized in various situations after assessments are completed. building/education. Group and individual solution-based counseling. Family referrals to community programs to include socialization, athletics, and family services. Special education referrals as needed on an individual basis. Behavioral interventions utilizing visual aids, verbal cues and specifically designed behavior plans to tailor individual needs as needed. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services to Students in Temporary Housing include but are not limited to: School Supplies Clothing Coats Counseling Services Intervention Services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. *Administration will closely review all resumes for each position. Also, the Administration will reach out for ESEA support to provided additional resumes that fit the needs of PS/IS 295. *PS/IS 295 has a highly selective interview process which includes an interview and a demo lesion. The interview takes places with a group and with Administration. The interviewers each ask questions and have a pot-interview meeting to discuss the most highly qualified candidates. These candidates are then given the opportunity to provide a demo lesion for the vacant position. The administers observe the lesson and have a post-observation meeting to discuss the most highly qualified candidate. *Administrators contact local colleges to determine if there are any graduating teachers or student teachers who are available to service schools through internships. This will allow future teachers to gain experience and develop skills that will help them to be successful in a full time position at PS/IS 295. *The school utilities The New Teacher Finder, a DOE resource, to locate and hire highly qualified candidates 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development for teachers, principals and paraprofessionals is ongoing, and is based on the needs of staff members. Professional development sessions are chosen and designed according to self-identified needs and observed needs as measured by Danielson observations conducted by school leaders. The professional development team which includes upper grade teachers, lower grade teachers, a paraprofessional, data specialist, ESL teacher, SLT members and school administrators look at our school data including Citywide Instructional Expectations, Danielson Framework, last Quality Review, Learning Environment Survey and our previous CEP goals to gather and triangulate the data to assess the areas in which we need to enhance and develop our current practices. ELA Instructors will attend professional development workshops: ELA Common Core Learning Standards, Writing Learning Objectives using the Common Core Learning Standards, Data Records and Analysis, Common Core Learning 2018-19 CEP 39  Standards timeline for implementation. The Common Core Learning Standards and Universal Design for Learning. Depth of Knowledge, Differentiated Instruction. *Align the curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards using the new Core Curriculum. *Use the common Core Learning Standards to devise all lesson plans *Development of Common Core Aligned Rubrics, Checklists and Assessments. *Instruct using performance based ELA tasks that are aligned with the CCLS *Teams of teachers within the school and administrators meet weekly to discuss, develop and review academic assessments and evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies and activities used in classroom instruction Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). . Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Common Core State Standards workshops are provided to Pre-K parents by the administrators , Pre-K teacher and Parent Coordinator. In addition Pre-K parents are invited to all parent workshops hosted for families from Pre-K to Grade 8. Parent workshops may include topics about: understanding grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy and mathematics. Our Pre-K students attend half day sessions Monday-Friday. Teachers use a thematic approach to provide students with daily reading, science, social studies, mathematics, and art. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 40  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) team and administrators meet to discuss DOE and curriculum based assessment options that were available to us as a school. We selected the assessments that were appropriately aligned to our curricula for Teachers College/Expeditionary Learning and Go Math/Math Connect in addition to grade level rubrics based performance tasks in order to match CCLS standards. Teachers receive professional development through Data Dives and using school data during Inquiry Sessions, grade meetings, and common planning periods to focus the level of instruction to enhance student performance. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 216,610.00 0 11,200.00 0 3,069,436.00 x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 41  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 295 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, and the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/IS 295 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S/I.S 295Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 45  I. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA Support home-school relationships by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences three times per year during which the child's progress and achievement will be discussed; arranging meetings during Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons; arranging meetings during flexible times (mornings/evenings) convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting before 12/1 of each school year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 46  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This direct instruction supplemental program will assist current ELLs and former ELLS who have passed the NYSESLAT within two school years to continue to develop strong academic skills in the areas of speaking, listening, reading, and writing to meet the challenges of Common Core Learning Standards in all academic areas. This program will allow the participating teachers to analyze data, review test history and follow recommendations through teacher articulation for each child. Teachers will utilize the above information, including each student's data from NYSESLAT test scores, iReady, and other Performance Series, so students can be grouped for appropriate instructional differentiation. This differentiation will target student areas in need of improvement. Periodic informal and formal assessments will be given to determine the students' progress and exit from the program. ELLs and former ELLs from Grade 2 to 8 will be invited to participate this program. There will be 37 students attend the program. The direct instruction supplemental program will be provided on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30p.m. to 4:00p.m. The program will start beginning of October . There will be total of 30 sessions. Each session lasts 1 hour and a half. Wednesday sessions will focus on Mathematics and Thursday session will focus on ELA. Even though English will be the language of instruction for this program, students' native language will be supported. Students will be provided with word to word translation in different content areas. The subgroups of students will be served include but not limited to : New comers, Long Term ELLs, Former ELLs and ELLs with Students with Disabilities. There will be two certified ENL teachers and one content area teacher in this program. The ENL teachers will team teaching with the content area teacher to strengthen students' comprehension skills. Students will be using Focused Reading Intervention by Teacher Created Materials Publishing to enhance their comprehension skills. Focused Reading focuses on developing reading comprehension skills in support of the Common Core State Standards. These materials meet the challenges faced by the diverse reading needs of the typical classroom. Each text includes vocabulary, grammar, reading comprehension and writing. In order to support our New Comers, Entering, and Emerging ELLs, a program called Imagine Learning will be used for the New Comer ELL students. This program actively engages and immerses students in a connected, expanding, and dynamic language environment. In addition to support our New Comers, two ipads will be used with phonics apps. This program will engage New Comers for basic vocabulary and fundamental phonics skills through technology. Moreover, online "kid-friendly" websites in the academic areas of social studies, science, ELA and math will also be used. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information All the invitations of the students to Title III is kept in a Title III Binder. Attendance and any notification that send home will be kept in the binder also. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III funding will provide Professional Development for ENL teachers and common branch teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms. Workshops will be scheduled to outline basic ELL strategies that can easily be adapted into the content areas by classroom teachers. In addition, time will be given to explain the components of and preparation for the NYSESLAT. Some of the main focuses of the PD sessions for this year will be content area vocabulary, differentiation, scaffolding, help ELL students to prepare for state exams, getting ready for NYSESLAT, and data analysis to better focus on individual instructional needs for each child. The PD will held about once a month starting October. All PDs will be an hour long. There will be total of 5 PDs when Title III is in session. Records, agendas, a copy of PD materials and attendance will be kept in a Title III Binder. The PD providers will be Linda Chan and Shazia Tirmizi who are ENL teachers. PD Dates: November 07, 2018, 4:15pm to 5:15pm: Looking at student data and grouping December 13, 2018, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Planning with Scaffolding Strategies with Visual Aids to Help the Students in Need January 09, 2019, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Mid-Assessment analysis and reflection, regrouping February 07, 2019, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Strategies to help students to get ready for ELA, Math exam and NYSESLAT. March 20, 2019, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Reflection and Next Step Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all after school activities provided by the ENL teachers and the parent coordinator. There will be three workshops for the parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. Flyers, in parents' preferred languages will be given to the parents prior to the workshops. Flyers will be translated to parents by our paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, and teachers. If a language is not available in school, then Translation and 2018-19 CEP 51 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Interpretation Unit will be contacted. Teachers will work together to create powerpoint presentation during workshops. The parent coordinator will encourage parents of ELLs to participate the workshop before and after school hours. The workshops will include: Tips on Communicating With Your Child at Home Even Though You Do Not Speak English; Preparing Your Child for State Exam; Preparing Your Child for NYSESLAT. Flyers will send home to each ELL parents in English and their native languages. During the workshops, translators will be provided if neccessary to help the ELL parents to benefit fully from the workshops. A copy of all invitations, agendas, attendance sheet will be kept in Title III binder. The workshop topics are as follow: November 29, 2018, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Strategies to help your kids at home January 24, 2019, 4:15pm to 5:15pm: Preparing Your Child for State Exams March 6, 2019, 4:15pm to 5:15pm : Preparing Your Child for NYSESLAT Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name PS/IS 295Q Borough Queens School Number 295 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deon LaVigne - Jones Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linda Chan Teacher/Subject Area Shazia Tirmizi Teacher/Subject Area Marian Egan Related-Service Provider Kelly Reustle Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Renee Pepper Coach N/A School Counselor Colleen O'Connell Parent Ingris Varela Parent Coordinator Alexa Visquerra Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Antoinette Rouseau Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 503 2018-19 CEP 54 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to serve all ELLs according to what they need, we assess the early literacy skills through running records, iReady online assessment, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT scores, performance series, Baseline assessment from schoolnet and teacher-created assessments, including those that are not in State testing grades. These results are used to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the students. It is also a good predictor of the performance of students in the upcoming state exams, as well as, in the classroom. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The results that are mention above are used to differentiate and scaffold lessons in order to enhance teaching practices. The results are a primer for advanced/intensive planning and preparation of lessons to meet students' individual learning needs. If the data reflects that there is a deficient in the phonics foundation, students will receive an intensive instruction on phonetic awareness lessons. Students who scored low in reading comprehension category and writing essay, ELLs need more scaffolding 2018-19 CEP 55  in writing and guided reading instruction. Students who scored low in Math will need assist on understanding math vocabulary and understanding math problems. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS/IS 295Q has been given out ELL Periodic Assessment throughout the school year to manage Grade 3-8 students' progress. Schoolnet reports help us to keep track of students' progress in proficiency of the four modalities. Classroom teachers use NYC Performance Series to keep track their students growth. For Grade K-2 students, our school has been using running record and teacher created assessment to monitor students' growth and need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After carefully looking at the result of the summative data, students who did not make any gain will be monitored closely by small group instruction or one on one conferencing. Different strategies will be used to promote students' academic growth, such strategies include, but are not limited to: building background knowledge, teaching front-load vocabulary, using sentence starters, graphic organizers, visual supports, scaffolding lessons, and teaching phonetic awareness. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After carefully looking at the result of NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, IReady Assessments, NYC Performance Series, ELL students who did not make any gain will be monitored closely by using the Response of Intervention (RtI) framework provided by New York State Office of English Language Learners and Student Support. Different strategies will be used to promote ELL students' speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills, such strategies include, but are not limited to: building background knowledge, teaching front-load vocabulary, using sentence starters, graphic organizers, visual supports, scaffolding lessons, and teaching phonetic awareness. ELLs who attend summer school and students who did not meet all the standards will receive Academic Intervention Service for a cycle of 6 to 8 weeks period. If no progress is made after AIS, School Based Support Team will evaluate the student for further services. ENL teachers will work closely with classroom teachers to provide support for Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction for ELLs who are struggling. Inquiry Teams will be held regularly to discuss support for academic language. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P.S./ I.S. 295 Q gathers assessment data through RLAT from ATS to get the score of NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. Our school uses ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to analyze home language, grade level, years of ELL services, ELA/math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, credit accumulation, holdover status, SIFE, status and disability classification. The data can help our school focus on the progress towards achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs, and the design of effective instructional programs and / or interventions for those students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After analyze the data mentioned above, ENL Department of P.S./ I.S 295 will disseminate these findings to the entire school staff through professional development. Classroom and cluster teachers will understand the function of EDAT. Discussions will be opened so our school can make adjustments to the ENL programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 CEP 56  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program at PS/IS 295Q has made every effort to ensure the NYS mandated minutes of support for all ELLs and former ELLs. There are two dually certified teachers in PS/IS 295 providing the services for all ENL students. All ELLs who are at Entering level will receive 180 minutes for stand-alone instruction and 180 minutes for integrated ENL instruction. For the ELLs who are at Emerging level will receive 180 minutes for stand-alone instruction and 180 minutes for integrated ENL. For the ELLs who are at Transitioning level will receive 90 minutes for stand-alone ENL instruction and 90 minutes for integrated ENL. For the ELLs who are at Expanding level will receive 180 minutes for integrated ENL instruction. For students who are at Commanding level for the past two years will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. During the stand-alone instruction model, kindergarten ELLs will be pulled from classroom, grade 1 and grade 2 ELLs will be grouped together, grade 3 and grade 4 will be grouped together, grade 5 and grade 6 will be grouped together, and grade 7 and grade 8 will be grouped together. These grouping is according to NYSESLAT grade band for testing. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL department of PS/IS 295Q will carefully look at the rlat report from ATS. Students will group by grade and their proficiency level. The ENL department will review the CR Part 154 for the mandated minutes for each proficiency level for stand-alone ENL. ENL teachers work closely with the person who does the program to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is enter correctly in STARS CLASSROOM. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The language of delivery for content area is English. To create an environment that will provide a positive learning experience in the content areas, teachers are first informed of each ELL student's English proficiency level as per the data derived from the NYSESLAT. PS/IS 295Q is currently using Ready-Gen and Expeditionary Learning during literacy time. These programs are designated by the NYS DOE to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. The school will also adopt Writer's Workshop for the 2017-2018 school year. PS/IS 295Q uses sheltered English to assist New Comers and ELL students who are at Entering level. ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and content area teachers use clear, direct, simple English, and a wide range of scaffolding strategies to communicate meaningful input in the content area to ELL students. The teachers will also differentiated instruction to meet the needs of the students. Different versions of assignments will be given to meet the specific needs of the students with IEPs. The students are grouped according to their language ability. Information is presented in a concise format making it more comprehensible. Instruction is scaffold through the use of visual aides, such as various graphic organizers, picture cards and anchor charts are utilized. Content area vocabulary is presented using regalia and picture dictionary. This is supported (when possible) with bilingual dictionaries and content area glossaries. Checklists and rubrics will also be used to monitor students' progress and the pace of meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? PS/IS 295Q ensures all ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by providing them bilingual books, and meeting one on one for conferencing to discuss the students' needs. If possible, a staff member who speaks the language will be invited to speak to the students in their native language. Also, translated NYS exams and word to word translated glossaries will be used. If translated exams are not available in an ELL student's native language, the Translation Unit is called to provide 2018-19 CEP 57  oral translation during State Exams. PS/IS 295Q library has bilingual books to support or new comers. ENL classroom also has bilingual books in students' native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) ELLs who are identified as SIFE will be provided with intervention services, like AIS. If qualified, students will be provided SETSS according to their IEPs. Students will also get invited to attend Title III program to support their academic needs. b) ELL students who are considered to ne newcomers get differentiated instruction with a strong emphasis on methodologies to increase basic vocabulary, spelling, grammar, and critical thinking skills. If appropriate, sentence starters will be used to prompt ELLs in writing. They are grouped together to allow for more individualized attention from the teachers. In addition, students are acclimated to life in the USA during trips outside the school building and through developing social skills and communication skills with their teachers and peers. Newcomers also get RTI for phonics, Fundations, online resources to strengthen phonetic awareness preparing them to become fluent readers. TPR is used when appropriate. c) ELL students who are here in the United States for 4 to 6 years get differentiated/scaffolding instruction with an intensive emphasis on reading and writing strategies based on assessment. Vocabulary instruction is incorporated on a regular basis to increase tier 2 and tier 3 academic vocabulary. Graphic organizers, hands-on-learning opportunities and picture prompts are used to deepen understanding and encourage critical thinking skills. Content area bilingual glossaries are available in home languages. d) ELL students who are identify as long term ELL will incorporate with abundance of figurative language and idioms into vocabulary lessons. Grammar focuses on word order, sentence structure, syntax and rules that deviate from the norm will be targeted so students can meet the Language Standards from the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, all long term ELLs are strongly advised to attend AIS and are requested to attend Title III programs. Students will be assessed periodically. e) The first two years of former ELL students who became proficient will be provided with 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL instruction. Also, they will get test accommodation as other ELL students. In addition, they will be invited to participate in Title III program. Struggling former ELL students will be provided with AIS service. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The majority of ELL-SWD students are in 12:1:1 Special Education Classes. The ENL program models for these classes are integrated and stand-alone. Each class has one fully certified special education teacher and at least one paraprofessional. The students support services vary from OT, PT, speech, individual counseling, SETSS for ELLs with IEP and ENL. During integrated model, ENL teacher adds scaffolding strategies to enhance students' reading, writing, and language skills. The scaffolding strategies include but are not limited to manipulative, visual support such as graphic organizers, and software program. ELL-SWD students will follow their IEP test modifications throughout different exams including ENL classes to meet their needs. In order to meet individual student's need, differentiation material is also provided. Students will learn about the same topic, but different lexile reading material will be provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All teachers who serve SWDs in PS/IS 295Q are encouraged to either have a copy of students' IEP, or to check the students' IEP regularly. If an ELL-SWD student meets the grade level in certain subject, he/she will join the general class for that subject. During the stand-alone model, ELL-SWD students are getting the same curriculum as in general class but with 2018-19 CEP 58  differentiated/scaffolded instruction with support from the ENL teachers. The ENL teachers review ELL-SWD students' IEP goals and joins all annual meeting in order to give input for student's academic progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention program available are AT-Risk AIS, Fundation, ReadyGen, Expeditionary Learning, GoMath, Writer's Workshop, iReady, and Title III. All targeted intervention programs are provided in English. For those students who have an IEP, SETSS, speech, OT, and PT are available to meet the IEP mandates. In addition, the guidance counselor has students mandated for individual and/or small group counseling. For the newcomer group, basic phonics skills and content area related vocabulary are the focus for instruction. Long Term ELLs' focus instruction is writing for all content area. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The instructional materials and technology available to the students are provided by iReady to individually assess students' weakest area. After the assessment, the program will provide suggestions for teachers to target students' weaknesses in both ELA and Math. ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning are the maiin insturctional materials in use in K-8 ELA classroom. GoMath is being used in math classes. This year, our school will use Passport for social studies. Some additional resources including abcmouse and learning a to z are online resources that allow students to listen to a story and learn a lesson online. This is especially useful for ELL students because they provide rich visual aids for the students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At this time, the after school and supplemental programs scheduled for the students, including ELL students in PS/IS 295Q are Tilte III, Champs, Tennis, Ballroom Dancing, and Middle School Choices during school days. All current ELL students and former ELL students for the past two years are invited to attend the Title III program. Letters are sent home to ask for parents' permission in their preferred language. For athletic activities, all students, including ELL students are welcomed to sign up and try out for those programs. Once they are chosen, they can perform for our school. Ballroom dancing are held during school hours; therefore, all ELLs will participate in those programs. ELLs who are struggling in class will be provided AIS service. Students' progress will be monitored closely. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials and technology available to the students are provided by iReady to individually assess students' weakest area. After the assessment, the program will provide suggestions for teachers to target students' weaknesses in both ELA and math. ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning are the main instructional materials in use in K-8 ELA classroom. GoMath is being used in math classes. Some additional resources including Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT series help ELL students to become familiar with the NYSESLAT in every Spring. For our new comers, starfall.com is used to assist them on phonics. Lower grade ELLs will use abcmouse.com for reading and listening skills. For upper grade ELLs, learning a to z will be used that allows students to listen to a story and learn a lesson online. This is especially useful for ELL students because they provide rich visual aids for the students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through the use of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Also the school library and ENL classroom include bilingual books on multiple reading levels. In a few classrooms, bilingual paraprofessionals are utilized for translation and assistance with ELL students according to their IEPs. Teachers are encouraged to use Google Translate to communicate with newcomer students for basic concepts and direction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 59  On the first day of school, ENL teachers print the report RLAT from ATS. They will use the report and group the students according to NYSESLAT grade band. All ELLs are provided with the minutes that are required by CR Part 154. ELL students who are qualified for required services such as speech, OT, PT, Adapted PhysED, AIS, SETSS will be grouped within their age and grade levels based on their IEPs. ELL students with OT, PT, speech and SETSS can be grouped for less than certain amount of students at a time according to their IEPs. ELL teachers are invited for IEP meetings for all SEEL-SWD students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials and technology available to the students are provided by iReady to individually assess students' weakest area. After the assessment, the program will provide suggestions for teachers to target students' weaknesses in both ELA and math. ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning are the main instructional materials in use in K-8 ELA classroom. GoMath is being used in math classes. Some additional resources including Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT series help ELL students to become familiar with the NYSESLAT in every Spring. Tumble books and BrainPop are online resources that allow students to listen to a story and learn a lesson online. This is especially useful for ELL students because they provide rich visual aids for the students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time, there is no program to assist newly enrolled ELL students prior to the beginning of the school year. However, ELL students who are newly enrolled during the school year will be provided with rich phonics instruction. They will also get differentiated lessons with rich visual support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The only language class that is available to ELL students in PS/IS 295Q is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development for school staff including subject area teachers, ENL teachers, special education teachers, and classroom teachers can attend the following sessions: ReadyGen, Expeditionary Learning, GoMath, Writer's Workshop, iReady, and Questioning strategies. School personnel, including subject area teachers, ENL teachers, special education teachers, and classroom teachers can get additional information or workshops through NYC Office of English Language Learners and Student Support. They can also get workshops that are provided by different publishers, UFT, and online PD. The professional developments that are offered to teachers of ELLs are provided by the DOE Field Support Team. The workshops are help bi-monthly by the director of ELL service from the district to ensure teachers have update information related to ELLs. Also workshops will also help ENL teachers to have the best practice for the ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 60  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the 50% of professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, ENL teachers in our school will attend professional development related to ELL topics from UFT, South Queens BFSC ELL team and from DELLSS. For other school staff including subject area teachers, special education teachers, and classroom teachers will receive their 15% of total hours of ELL-specific professional development from the ENL teachers who will turnkey useful material from the PD they've attended. Agendas will be kept as record. When the ENL teachers provide PD, attendance will be taken. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers in PS/IS 295Q provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during Parent Engagement on every Tuesday from 2:30pm to 3:00pm. A letter is sent home to notify the parents for the time and date. The ENL teachers will first know if a translator will be needed. If no one on staff can translate, Translation and Interpretation unit will be contacted. The annual meeting is a requirement from the revised CR Part 154. These meetings are not including the mandated parent orientation and parent teacher conference. The meeting will discuss parent's concerns and goals for their children. At the meeting, ENL teachers can get a better ideas of the parents' concerns, English support from home, and provisions for translation during the annual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all school wide activities including PTA. PTA hold fundraisers to support events and workshops through bake sales and candy sales. Also, fundraisers are scheduled throughout the year for various charities. The school also holds different international celebrations. All flyers of activities are posted throughout school. If necessary, translation is provided by school personnel and by parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deon Lavigne-Jones, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 295Q School DBN: 29Q295 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deon LaVigne-Jones Title Principal Renee Pepper Assistant Principal Alexa Visquerra Parent Coordinator Linda Chan Ingris Varela Kelly Resutle ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Colleen O'Connell School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/13/2017 09/13/2017 09/13/2017 09/13/2017 1/1/01 09/13/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/13/2017 09/13/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q295 School Name: PS/IS 295 Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Linda Chan ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess the written and oral translations needs of all parents include, but are not limited to : careful examination of the HLIS forms, ATS report (RAPL), student emergency contact cards, and a DOE language identification letter to determine the language of correspondence preferred by our parents, articulation with bilingual teachers and para-professionals. We also conferred the Pupil Accounting secretary and the Parent Coordinator in order to determine what types of services are necessary so that parents can be well informed about events: Parent-Teacher Conferences, meetings, workshops, trainings, assemblies, trips and special ceremonies or performances. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Punjabi Urdu Arabic Chinese Haitian Creole Hindi Tagalog Tamil Albanian Malayalam 373 100 9 10 10 10 5 6 10 2 3 1 1 69% 20% 1.6% 1.9% 1.9% 1.9% 0.9% 1% 1.9% 0.4% 0.6% 0.2% 0.2% 373 100 9 10 10 10 5 6 10 2 3 1 1 69% 20% 1.6% 1.9% 1.9% 1.9% 0.9% 1% 1.9% 0.4% 0.6% 0.2% 0.2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We do not have any languages which fall into this category Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Meet the Teachers Night September 17, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference Fall notice November 15, 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will use our school staff and/or send the notices to the Translation and Interpretation Unit the first day of school. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff and/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit month prior. For 2018-19 CEP 65  Parent Teacher Conference Spring notice March 14, 2019 PTA notices Throughout the year End of Year Conference May 15, 2019 Half Day notices Throughout the year Trip Permission Slips Throughout the year non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit a month prior. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" at least two weeks before any events For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit a month prior. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit a month prior. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" At least two weeks before any events. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" Eighth Grade Graduation Information Throughout the year At least two weeks to a month prior Testing memo Throughout the year IEP meeting Notice Throughout the year Special Events Throughout the year We will use our school staff/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit a month prior. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff and/or send the notice to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Two weeks prior to meetings. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" We will use our school staff/or send to the Translation and Interpretation Unit a month prior. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 66  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher Night in September September 17, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference in Fall November 15, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference in Spring March 14, 2019 End of Year Meeting May 15, 2019 IEP Meetings Appointment Based Parent Engagement Meetings Every Tuesday Intervention Meetings Appointment Based interpretation service(s)? Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service Use school staff and/or call over-the-phone interpretation service 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. During a school emergency, we will first use our staff to reach limited-English-proficient families. If a language is spoken that none of our staff can speak, we will use over-the-phone interpretation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Each year, the Language Access Coordinator will present a PD to the school staff members. At the professional development session, the LAC will provide the phone number and the email of the Translation and Interpretation Unit to all staff. The LAC will also explain the importance and the function of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to meet Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, parents will receive Parent's Guide to Language Access from the Department of Education once the school year starts. Parents will be provided with written notification regarding translation and interpretation services available in the language indicated on the HLIS form, and the DOE 2018-19 CEP 67  Language Identification Letter. Parents will also be directed to the DOE website for complete information regarding this regulation and their translation rights. Our school will distribute the flyers provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? After each parent workshop, a feedback form will be provided for the parents to give us their suggestions. In addition, parent survey will be given out every year regarding their thoughts and feelings toward the school. Our school will take the feedback into consideration and strive to improve to meet our parents' needs. All surveys will be given in the languages that the parents selected. Surveys will send to Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 68 
