2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q314 School Name: EPIC HIGH SCHOOL - SOUTH Principal: SUBHAS MOHAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information EPIC High School – South 27Q314 342700010314 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 121-10 Rockaway Boulevard, South Ozone Park, NY 11420 718-845-1290 Phone Number: 718-843-2072 Fax: SubhasMohan smohan@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: SubhasMohan Erin Hogan Lenora Simmons SubhasMohan JoicelynMcMillan-Green SeemaRamdat AmirThomson Ms. Monique District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Juan Mendez Superintendent: 39-40 Linden Place, Queens, New York 11354 jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens South FSC Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Queens, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-348-2997 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SubhasMohan Erin Hogan Lenora Simmons Al Fuentes JoicelynMcMillan-Green SeemaRamdat Amir Thomson NeetaAhmed Vanessa Reed *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Danielle Washington Monique Fletcher Yvette Trossi Shantera Grant ReshmaPooran Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Student Representative Member/ Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The EPIC High School model integrates a combination of design elements, practices, structures, and resources to ensure that students graduate with: (1) positive sense of self, (2) an “ I can...” mentality, and (3) the capacity to transform the world around them having experienced a rigorous, comprehensive, coherent and supported education. Additionally, the schools promote the values of empowerment, personalization, inclusion and service, collective work, continuous growth and cultural relevance (EPIC ). 2018-19 CEP 9  Mission Statement Borne out of the NYC Young Men’s Initiative, EPIC Schools challenge all students to dream big and support them in designing their future. We recognize that each student is an individual, and therefore provide a series of learning experiences that equip young people to walk their unique paths. We honor and integrate the cultures of our communities to make learning relevant, responsive, and accessible, as we develop citizens with a positive sense of self, ready to stand for social justice. Vision Statement All graduates of EPIC Schools will be college and career ready as we provide a meaningful pathway to lifelong learning for every student. By fostering the boldness to dream and by developing a commitment to inner growth and outward transformation, our graduates will be ready to design their own futures . 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. EPIC High Schools emphasize three key areas of work: practice, people and place. PRACTICE: Culturally relevant and purposeful learning experiences leading to the mastery of skills Competency-based framework integrating academic, social-emotional, college and career-readiness learning goals. Personalized learning pathways that challenge students while providing them with targeted support. Ongoing and varied assessments that afford students multiple and diverse opportunities to achieve and demonstrate mastery. Integrated technology and data use to personalize learning and facilitate access to resources. Early College and workplace learning opportunities for students that form a “readiness bridge” into post-secondary opportunities. Youth development practices and strategies that support students through mentoring, rites of passage and restorative justice. PEOPLE: Culturally relevant staffing and development based on students’ real-time needs Flexible adult roles and schedules that accommodate students’ varying needs. Personalized professional learning plans that support the continuous growth of our staff. Adult competencies based on EPIC learning priorities and students’ needs which serve as bases for staff selection and professional development. Leadership pipelines that foster professional growth, collaboration and mentorship. Holistic and purposeful evaluation that emphasizes effective teamwork and individual growth and development. PLACE: Culturally relevant environments that nurture growth, community and positive identity 2018-19 CEP 10  Community-based partnerships connecting services, supports and real-world learning opportunities. Advocacy and activism that surface and address constraints that hinder student growth. Family engagement that ensures real partnership and shared leadership by the community. Support services and operations systems that remove barriers to learning for students. Built environments that are intentionally designed to support transformational learning. Resource/Organization List The development of EPIC High Schools is a product of wide research and thought partnership with numerous experts and organizations across the relevant domain areas. Additionally, EPIC is forging strategic alliances with local and national organizations that will support both the implementation of these schools as well as broader advocacy around policies related to Black and Latino youth. EPIC high school South is one to one technology school where each student is provided with chromebook upon registration. Queens Borough President, Melinda Katz have provided us with a $105,000 grant to further support our technology program. Students keep the chromebooks for the duration of their high school years with us. Our teachers integrate the use of chromebooks with various tools such as Google classroom and docs to support individual learning needs as well as teachers" instructional methodologies. In our fourth year of existence EPIC South has evolved into a comprehensive high school offering a myriad of courses including five Advance Placement Courses and before and after-programs. We provide an intensive Regents preparatory tutoring program support students in achieving the benchmark for CUNY college ready standard. At the core of our social and emotional student development is Rights of Passage (ROP). ROP provides students to real-world tools to navigate the adult world at large. Our students learn how to construct a resume, interact with college recruiters, manage money, manage their online presences and accept accountability for their actions. Our community partners include Beacon and Girls Inc which supports our after-school program and internships. Co-Designers BEACON Institutional Support Open Society Foundations Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility United Federation of Teachers NYC Writing Project Center for Collaborative Education Young Men’s Initiative Local Schools and Teachers Student Fellows – current NYC DOE high school students working to prototype and test school design elements Implementation Partners Thought Partnership 2018-19 CEP 11  Curricular Assets Relevant Learning Experiences Think through Math Forum for Youth Investment Educurious Carnegie Foundation Re-Inventing Schools Coalition Capacity Building NYU Metro Center Learning to Work NYC Mastery Collaborative Summit Public Schools (CA) Virtual Learning Academy Show Evidence Competency Works Bronx Arena Transfer HS James Baldwin High School Staffing New City Men Teach Youth Development Institute Urban Teacher Corps NYC Teaching Fellows 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The total number of our ELL students for 2018-2019 is 38. The specific distribution of levels are as follows: 5 students are emerging, 16 are Transitioning, 16 are expanding and 1 is entering. This diverse needs necessitates flexible programming to ensure all students are serviced appropriately in order to accelerate their language acquisition. Many of the students are recent immigrants and are adjusting to their new culture. EPIC has a diverse student body and initiatives such as a all students should be in a school club that is aligned to their interest and teachers ensuring that their curriculum is culturally relevant continues to be work in progress. The total number of students with IEP's for the 2018 2019 school year is 82. 50 of the students are in an ICT setting while 32 are in a self-contain setting. This increase in population necessitated a full time dedicated ENL teacher for the 2018 2019 school year. We have programmed ENL students with similar needs to be clustered by class. In addition, to meet the need of all students our ENL teacher will be providing services during zero period. Our ENL teacher and IEP coordinator provide on going professional learning to the staff so they may better serve the needs of our ENL students. We offer a combination of self-contain and integrated co-teaching classes to ensure students the instructional support is aligned with the student's needs. Our hiring practice for special education teachers is centered around dual licensing to ensure both teachers are content specialist. We have also hired a bilingual special education teacher to meet the needs of our ELL students the both ICT and self-contained classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 12  During the 2017-18 school year, EPIC High School – South made the greatest progress in the Framework for Great Schools element of Supportive Environment. The school focused on a cultural shift to higher academic expectations for all students. In practice we offered Chemistry, and 5 advance placement classes which was a result of our partnership with DOE's AP for All initiative. We plan on further expanding our AP course offering to 6 AP classes; AP World History, AP Environmental science, AP psychology, AP Statistics, AP Human Geography, AP language and AP Art. Additionally, all students enrolled in regents classes were expected to take and pass their respective regents exams at the end of the school year. This expectation was a marked shift from the first two years of the schools existence. Curriculum and instruction will continue to be an area of focus as they were highlighted in a review of our practice during the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q314 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 329 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 8 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 66.6% % Reduced Lunch 8.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.0% 28.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.31 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 12 13 83.5% 2.4% 17.9% 34.0% 27.1% 7.3% 0 10% 7.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. EPIC HS South has a relatively inexperienced staff who is in the early stages of engaging in action research around best practices. As a school, we have determined that an area of growth in pedagogy is differentiating our instructional plans to meet the needs of every student. Students continue to underperformed on elements of the NYS Regents exams that require strong problem-solving skill. For example, on average 88.3 % of the responses on the constructive response questions on the algebra 1 regents exam resulted in a score of zero points by students. The geometry regents results were similar in that 78.4 % of responses earned zero points points and on the Algebra II regents, 84.9% of the responses earned a zero points. Additionally, on the living environment regents, only 36% of student responses earned a passing score on the constructive responses. Based these item analysis data from the June 2018 Regents exams, across subject areas, we have decided to continue to focus on infusing problem solving and reasoning skills into this year’s instructional practice. Evidence of the lack of student fluency in problem solving and reasoning was also evident in the 2017 – 2018 data on Advance Teacher ratings. 52..% of teachers received a rating of Developing on Component 3b, Questioning and Discussion. 30% of teachers were rated Developing in Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Lastly, 37% of teachers were rated Developing in Component 3d: Assessment in Instruction. We have determined that in order to evaluate and improve our practice in these skill sets, an inquiry approach is best suited since it allows us to work as researchers and gather data on our practices which in turn will drive real-time change in practice. Our professional learning plan is driven both on teachers' learning gaps uncovered in observation reports as well as students' learning gaps uncovered in formative and summative assessments that are mined in Skedula. Our over-arching approach is to build students fluency and efficacy in problem solving. Our strategies will include, across subject areas, teachers developing and engaging students in authentic tasks that allow them to develop problem solving skill. Additionally, we are grounding our approach in shifting students mindset from that of a dependent learner to an independent learner. Research has demonstrated that this self-reliance often result increase student achievement. This school year we will be utilizing the text, Culturally Responsive Teaching & The Brain by Zaretta Hammond as the framework for teacher and student development. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 15  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the Regents passing rates on the living environment and algebra 1 regents exams as evidenced by the June 2019 Regents administration. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will be organized by department to ensure the process is substantive and grounded in content and skill. Teacher teams will engage in the inquiry cycle using Data Wise Inquiry model. Professional learning will be embedded in the inquiry cycle to ensure alignment and real-time implementation based on analysis of student performance data. Our three newly hired Peer Collaborative Teacher will be coordinating our whole staff and individualized professional learning cycles. Within each cycle varying in duration (on average 6 weeks) there will be professional learning provided each Monday and Tuesday moorings. Each cycle will have a instructional practice goal which will be monitored for growth through teacher inter-visitations, and PCT AP/Principal classroom visit. Advance data will also be used All Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, All Teachers, PCT Cycle 1 Pd - September 2018 - November 2018 Complete first round of teacher observations by end of November. Subsequent PD cycles will be determine based on end of cycle assessment 2018-19 CEP 17  to measure progress in teacher practice during each cycle. Professional Development opportunities will be provided based on staff needs and interest, with a focus on using data to inform instruction, and differentiated instruction to support English Language Learners. Identified strategies will be utilized and added to the unit plans. Department leads will attend professional development at FSC. The initial professional learning needs will focus on strategies to develop students learning gaps in problem solving. The learning management platform, Skedula will be leveraged to monitor student progress and provided guidance and next steps towards mastery of targeted learning standard. The Wizard TM will continue to be tool of choice to develop on-going student assessment and common assessments within subject area. Based on our improve usage last year with the IO Assessment tool in math and science , its use will be expanded to all departments. There will be training provided our teachers by IO staff in September 2018. Additionally, teachers, by department will coordinate their common assessment to ensure students' progress is measured and monitored. All Staff September 2018 and then ongoing after each PD cycle. Principal, Assistant Principal, All Teachers, PCT All Students September 2018 acquire subscription and provide teacher training on IO assessment during period 5 common planning time. Principal, Assistant Principal, All Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, All Teachers All Students September 2018 acquire Wizard subscription. September 2018 One common assessment/subject will be completed by the end fo each marking period. During April and May 2019 Mock regents will be administered and scored. 2018-19 CEP 18 After school tutoring will begin in October 2018 and continue until June 2019. Unit planning will begin in September 2018 and continue until May 2019. Period 5 common planning time will be used to complete this task. We will also conduct a Mock Regents administration in April 2019 to assess students strengths and deficits in preparation for success on the respective regents exams. Instructional support of student progress such as tutorial and Regents prep will occur in all classes, Advisory, and during after-school and/or Saturday or after-school opportunities Students will be supported by a variety of strategies including the use of binders, students’ agendas, Cornell Notes, Academic and Content Vocabulary, text annotation and close reading, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning and Common Core aligned units. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All teachers will continue to input student performance data in Pupilpath, our online portal, so that families may retrieve students' performance data as well as communicate with teachers on student progress. We will utilize our Student Led Conferences in November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019 to share students exemplar work products and engage families in the learning process. Department supervisors will monitor teachers, students and parents online activity with the portal to ensure it maximization by all stakeholders. At our September Back to School Night, teachers will introduce our Pupilpath portal to families and provide them with their access credentials, Our Parent Coordinator will be the point person for parent support with Pupilpath. Our Tuesday's Parent Engagement time will be dedicated to parent out reach as well as providing teachers time to update student performance data in Pupilpath. Our PTA meetings will be leveraged to provide an understanding of CCLS as well as to provide resources to support families at home. Department Teacher Leads (DTL) will coordinate workshops at various PTA meetings over the course of the school year. Additionally, we will couple our PTA meetings with our Awards Night to increase PTA attendance and celebrate student achievement. The following PTA meetings will be dual purpose meetings; November 2018, December 2018, and May 2019. Our Weekly Parent Newsletter will provide ongoing resources to parents to support their children at home. Our Parent Coordinator will gather resources from each department, add them to the newsletter and then email the newsletter to students and families via our epicschools gmail domain. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will be scheduled to participate in staff development during before and after work hours ,planning for implementation of strategies in instruction, providing tutorial for students, and purchasing supplemental instructional resources such as Regent test bank. Additionally, a consultant group will be utilized to assist with teacher pedagogy development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark goal will be a minimum of 2% points increase from the respective June 2018 regents results. In January 2019, student mean test scores on their common assessment will be used to measure students progress towards passing the Regents exams and achieving our end of your passing rate goal. Additionally, our April 2019 mock regents exams result will also used as final benchmark prior to the June 2019 regents exam with a goal of a minimum of 3% increase. Both the common assessment and the mock regents exam are reliable instruments in predicting future students performance. These test are comprise of only past regents questions and the distribution of the various types of questions on the test mirrors that of the regents exams. In addition to the June 2018 NYS regents results, teachers will utilized baseline and end of unit exams as instruments to monitor students progress by standard. In order to ensure the accuracy of this instrument, all exams will mirror the NYS regents exams including the use of past regents questions, and formatting the exam in quantity and proportion of questions. These data will be mined and maintained in IO Assessments. To triangulate data points, additional data sets will be garnered from students such as samples of students work on targeted standard along with student survey to ascertain their perspectives on the implemented teaching strategy to support their learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of choice to measure student progress will be standard based assessments developed on WizardTM. These assessments will mirror the regents exams in questions, formatting and pacing in order to control for most variables leading to greater reliability of the instrument. IO Assessment will be used to mined and monitor student achievement data towards mastery of targeted standard and overall progress to passing the regents exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our School Quality Guide survey, among all six measures, demonstrated a mean positive response of 62% in 2015-2016, 65% in 2016-2017 and 79% in 2017-2018 school years. 2017-2018 survey revealed 3% increases in students feeling safer in the school and and a 2% increase student awareness of the college enrollment process. Although this increase indicates a positive shift to a more supportive environment our school continues to lag behind Citywide averages in social and emotional support. Our priority for the upcoming school year is recapture the "family feel" culture that existed when the school was in its infancy. To that end we aim to create a culturally inclusive community where all students feel they belong to the larger school community. Last school year we established an ROP (Rights of Passage) committee to evaluate and strength our advisory curriculum. To continue this growth next school year we plan on reacquiring a vendor that previously supported ROP and to provide teacher training for implementing our ROP curriculum. Based on our success last school year, specifically with a 10% decrease in suspension rates across the school and particularly with our SPED students, we will renew our contract with PBIS and continue to expand the program. During the 2017-2018 school year students participated in a number of programs that supported their social and emotional growth specifically, Girls Inc, StepUP, ROP and our Beacon after-school program. Additionally, we held student government elections for the second time in two years which resulted in a greater number and diversity of student representatives. As our school continues to grow to full capacity we will continue to refine our discipline code and develop a culture of positive behavior by empowering students to be an integral part of the developmental process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the mean score on the Supportive Environment category of the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By September 2018, we will maintain the two part-time deans position who will be responsible for strengthening our PBIS program. An EPIC student code of conduct will be developed, published and disseminated to students and families. These expectations will be communicated to student during grade level assemblies, morning meetings, parent meetings and in email form. We will establish a PBIS/ROP committee to review curriculum and implementation of our PBIS program. We will renew our contract with Brotherhood Sistersoul to support teacher development and implementation of the ROP curriculum. The school will communicate and enforced a clear disciplinary framework that includes corrective and restorative responses to offences, and preventative measures. School personnel will be reallocated to ensure availability for de-escalation of occurrences at any given time during the school day. All students September 2018- Renew PBIS subscription School Dean and All other Staff and revise student code of conduct. September 2018- Acquire SED vendor to provide teacher training. October 2018 begin ROP training for teachers. Training will occur during PD 5 common planning time. October 2018: Begin ROP meetings every Wednesday period 8. Monthly PBIS celebration will begin in October 2018 and culminate in June 2019. All students September 2018 - Grade level assemblies and email updated Code of Conduct to students and families School Dean and All other Staff All students September 2018-June 2019: All Staff 2018-19 CEP 22 Student Led Conferences are held so that students will be aware of strengths and weaknesses, both social/emotional, and be able to advocate their needs to all stakeholders involved, and to design and implement a plan of action. All students will be participate in a school based student club. Collaboratively develop and implement a protocol for identifying at risk students then leverage guidance counselors and youth development coaches to provide individualize targeted support including restorative discipline. Teachers will be trained to use Skedula to input anecdotes about students academic and behavior performance, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Weekly grade level staff meeting to be facilitated by guidance counselor September 2018- Conduct student/teacher club interest survey. By October 2018: Establish all the clubs and developed a period 5 schedule of meeting times. November through May engage in weekly club meetings. By October 2018 All staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal along with the parent coordinator and the guidance team/teachers will provide periodic workshops during PTA meetings to empower parents with the tools necessary to support their children. Staff will also communicate with families via phone, email and Skedula to inform and devise strategies to support student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for participating in staff development and analysis of student behavior data, planning for implementation of strategies, and providing behavior support structures for students. Students will need training for participation on the Fairness Committee. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  Our mid-point benchmark data will be collected via an online survey that will be conducted in googleforms in January 2019. The survey will utilize questions that mirror the School Survey question to determine students perception of the school environment. The target mid-point benchmark is at least 2% increase compare to the 66% baseline data demonstrated on the 2017 - 2018 School Survey. Other contributing data points that will be collected to informally measure school environment will be, students behavior reports compiled in Skedula and in ORRS, The Skedula reports provides behavioral incidence and classification around the school campus. Our goal is to observe a downward trend as we progress through each month. All staff will enter and compile records and documentation including Attendance, Tardies, and disciplinary data into Skedula beginning in the Fall 2018 semester. Staff will engage in ongoing study of data on students who have had cases during our Congruency Meeting identifying trends in repeated behaviors, new conflicts, and new violations of the school norms and citywide rules. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The primary instrument used to measure progress will be collected from a mid-line student online survey using googleforms. The survey questions will be obtained from the NYC School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our School Survey demonstrated a mean positive response in the Collaborative Teacher measure of 58% in 2015-2016, 74% in 2016-2017 and 78% in 2017-2018. We aim to continue to strengthen the capacity building of existing strategies to maintain this annual trajectory. Additionally, the 2017-2018 survey data demonstrated Peer Collaboration score of 79% compared to 2016-2017 survey data of 84%. We believe this drop was due to the loss of common planning time. The Principal Performance Observation report further confirmed the need to support teacher teams in engaging in the collaborative process to improve teacher pedagogy. According to the annual report on teacher performance on the Danielson Framework for teaching and learning, 52..% of teachers received a rating of Developing on Component 3b, Questioning and Discussion. 30% of teachers were rated Developing in Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Lastly, 37% of teachers were rated Developing in Component 3d: Assessment in Instruction. We have determined that in order to evaluate and improve teacher practice we will need to increase both the quality and quality of professional development. To that end we have made some fundamental changes on scheduling to increase address both quantity and quality. We have decided to utilize a single lunch period thereby affording all teachers to be available for common planning at the same time. Additionally, we have changed that start of the school day and with the support of an SBO we know have two days of professional development each week. As a small staff with small number of teachers in each department it has been challenging to identify that threshold of number and combination of staff to form well-developed collaborative committees. For example, our science department with only 3 teachers can potentially limit diversity in thought and experience. The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development, curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work, and process refinement. Teachers professional learning cycles included targeted instructional practice such as, differentiated instruction strategies, check for understanding and initial stages of genuine discussion among students. The school needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to support teachers in the analysis of formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. Teachers need to continue to participate in staff development opportunities in providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% decrease in the number of developing rating in component 3b, 3c and 3d as measured in Advance by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning. 2018-19 CEP 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will meet at their IPC's with the supervisors to determine their pedagogical goals. All Staff September 2018 Principal, AP's, PD Committee, PCT's All Staff PD committee will reconvene to review aggregated teacher performance data and develop a PD Plan Inquiry teams will engage in the data driven cycle in which members will implement research-based instructional strategies to support both targeted instructional gaps as well as learning gaps. Cycles of professional learning will be developed and implemented on a six week time-line. During each PL cycle teachers will conduct inter-visitations, coaches will monitor and support teacher progress. Supervisors will also measure and support teacher development through the observation process. Principal, PD Committee, PCT's September 2018 - November Cycle 1 October -November - Observation Cycle 1 will be completed. By End of January 2019 Observation cycle 2 will be completed. By March 2019 Cycle 3 observation will completed and by May 2019 Cycle 4 observation will be completed. 2018-19 CEP 27 Principal, AP's and PCT Principal, AP's, and PCT By September 2018 teacher/coach pair will be identified. October 2018 - May 2019: ongoing coaching September 2018-June 2019: On going Each Peer Collaborative Teacher will strategically be assigned to teachers to coach based on their needs. All Staff All Staff Teachers will be provided opportunities in building leadership capacity through professional development and collaboration. Each department will have a Department Teacher Lead (DTL) who will support their teams in the inquiry cycle. The DTL's will receive training from the Principal, AP, PCT and FSC. Teachers will be provided with opportunities to participate in classroom inter-visitations as well as sharing best practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will be provided periodic workshops over the course of the year to empower parents with tools to support their children. Tools may include online resources and strategies to support the development of strong work ethic in students. Teachers will strengthen their communication with families through the Skedula and our new SMS messaging. These nature of the communications will be critical in engaging families and students in the process of teacher development. The expectation is teachers will be transparent with students and seek out their support and guidance as they continue to refine their practice. For example, as we endeavor to shift students mindset from one of dependence to independence students themselves should be aware of the initiative and be able to participate in meta-cognitive analysis of their own growth as the move across the spectrum. Similarly, the initiative should be communicated to families as well as strategies for supporting and monitoring students development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for participating in staff development and leadership opportunities, professional development on the learning management system and mastery-based grading, a common forum for communication and planning, & 2018-19 CEP 28  shared resources within and between schools, and time for collaborating and planning implementation of instructional strategies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will be a mean score increase of 3% from the 2017 2018 School Survey report, on a teacher survey utilizing selected questions from the NYC school survey instrument. This mid-point survey will be conducted in February 2019. The same survey will be administered again in May to measure progress toward target of a 3% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Two instruments will be employed to measure progress towards the goal: 1) School survey on googeform 2) Teachers' progress on classroom observations that are mined in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The survey results in the School Quality Guide report for Effective School Leadership demonstrated a positive response of 45% in 2015 2016, 78% in 2016 2017 and 83% in 2017-2018. This was a significant increase in effective school leadership. A myriad of measures contributed to this increase including systems that were implemented to support and monitor progress and a shift in expectation for both staff and students. We aim to continue this upward trajectory for the 2018-2019 school year During the 2016 2017 and 2018-2019 school year, all teachers obtained the required number of observations. According to the Advance MoTP 2017-2018 end of year report, Although all teachers were observed by the end of the school year, the completion rate was not continuous and timely. This resulted in teachers not receiving ongoing timely feedback from school leaders. Additionally, the superintendent provided invaluable feedback on the quality of the supervisor's feedback to effect change and growth in teacher practice. This superintendent's evaluation/feedback identified areas for improvement in our leadership practice to drive change in teacher practice. This school year we will formally implement those leadership practices in providing feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers would have been observed and will be provided with high quality actionable and timely feedback by school leaders at a consistent rate over the course of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All school leaders will achieve the quarterly observation completion target. All Staff By November 2018- 25% observation completion target. Principal, AP By January 2019 - 50% observation completion target. March 2019 - 75% observation completion target. By May 2019 100 % observation completion target. Norming will occur in September and October 2018 and in February and March 2019 Principal, AP All Staff All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP Depending on individual teacher needs, the principal/AP will modify the frequency of informal and formal walk-throughs / observations and provide timely and actionable feedback to teachers. The principal/AP will engage in joint observations to norm our evaluation and feedback The principal will provide feedback to AP's on the quality of their written feeback/next in the observation report of teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 31  Over the course of the school year the Principal along with the parent coordinator and guidance team will host will utilize portions of each PTA meetings to address both student achievement and social emotional needs. Mini-parent workshops will be provided during this allotted time both by parents, community partners and school staff. These workshops aim to provide skills and resources to parent that can me leveraged to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal/AP will allocate time to visit classrooms and to meet with the staff as an entire group as well as individually to provide support. The principal/AP and the PD committee will need time to design and present professional development opportunities as well as time to reflect on implementation and identify additional supports needed by teachers. The portion of this meeting time will be before and after school requiring per session compensation for teachers. Our TDEC will be leveraged to support teacher evaluation and feedback. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will be 50% of all observations would have been completed by the end of January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School leaders progress will be captured and measured in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has struggled to effectively engage parents. The establishment of the Parent Teacher Association came in the Spring of 2015. A parent focus group identified needs related to consistent communication with parents, and increasing opportunities for parents to engage when they can. At the end of the 2016 SY an awards night was planned and conducted at the PTA meeting. This strategy delivered success evidenced by approximately 50 attendees which is greater than previous meetings. Over the course of the 2017-2018 school year we continued to utilized the strategy of coupling our monthly award ceremony with our PTA meetings and this produced increase parents attendance with an averaged of approximately 30 families. Our priority is to increase the level of parent engagement both in person and through various electronic platforms. Although we utilized Puilpath as our online gradebook where teachers, students and families can access students performance data and communicate directly with each other, we found that less than 20% of families are taking advantage of this resource on a regular basis. We aim to increase parent engagement with this platform over the course the school year. We will continue utilize this strategy and add innovative practices to encourage greater parent involvement in our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in overall parent engagement on our online gradebook platform, Pupilpath. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/guardians will attend the Fall or Spring Student Led Conferences where students will present their portfolio of work and their progress utilizing data found in PupilPath All Families Parents/guardians will participate in All Families our summer bridge and orientation program for incoming 9th graders. Parents/guardians will participate in at least one parent training session on topics including graduation requirements, preparing for college, and using PupilPath to monitor student grades and attendance. SMS messaging will be procured and be utilize by all teachers to communicate to students and families. September 2018 November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019 July 2018 September 2019 All Staff Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Youth Counselors Principal Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Principal All Families October 2018 Procure SMS contract by September 2018 School materials and meetings will be translated and made accessible to all families in their primary language. Wednesday Parent Engagement times will be used to plan and provide parent workshops and schedule one to one meetings with parents. Our parent coordinator will refined our email distribution list to ensure all parents have an identified email address. September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Principal Families for whom English is not the primary language 2018-19 CEP 34 Parent Coordinator will email to all students and parents a weekly newsletter. This year we aim to develop and launch our website. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Beacon and Project Hope Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for scheduling and conducting home visits, preparing for and conducting parent meetings and training, time to prepare students to present during student led conferences, collecting data on parent participation and survey feedback, and time to train staff in the use of School Messenger, Skedula and social media. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 5% increase in families usage of Pupilpath to monitor student achievement and communicate with teachers. We will monitor families activity rates in Skedula The Parent Coordinator will create a spreadsheet listing all the PTA meetings as well as the attendance for each meeting. Attendance data will be monitored throughout the school year using the spreadsheet. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Multiple data points will be captured to assess parent engagement: The instruments include attendance sheets, from all parent events, percent of parent email addresses in our distribution list, parent online engagement with the Pupilpath platform. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for collecting an archiving the data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not on grade level in math skills, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, failed regents exams, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Social Studies Students not reading on grade level, students not passing Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Academic Literacy strategies, Achieve 3000, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Think Through Math online support, basic math skills supports, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Achieve 3000, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Achieve 3000, Cornell Notes, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During school day, after school academy, using online resources Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During school day, after school academy, using online resources Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During school day, after school academy, using online resources Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During school day, after school 2018-19 CEP 36  the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronic attendance/tardies, multiple disciplinary events or a single major disciplinary event Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Meeting with guidance counselor, home visits, phone calls to parents/guardians, conflict resolution, restorative approaches, Pupil Personnel Team academy, using online resources Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 Students – Doubled up, 3 Students in Shelter, 1 Student in Temporary Living Situation, 1 Student Without Housing Status 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Each students will be assigned to a Youth Development Coach who will assist with monitoring academic and social and emotional needs and provide strategic support. Students will also receive additional services from their guidance counselors. Based on funding availability, we will purchase and provide basis school and living supplies to each students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Epic High School – South recruits staff with the assistance of the Urban Teacher Corps to ensure that we select from a pool of highly qualified teachers. We also select from the NYC Teaching Fellows program and Open Market Transfer. Teachers are encouraged to lead in areas where they are qualified, and to develop themselves in areas where they are not yet qualified. We seek to create a teacher preparation pipeline for non-credentialed staff who desire to make that transition. Teachers are encouraged to assume teacher leadership roles within the school such as grade or curriculum leader. Both teachers and students are active members of the school’s hiring committee. We engage teacher candidates in a rigours vetting process that begins with an initial phone screening followed by an interview with a our hiring committee. The process continues with a demonstration lesson and a debrief with the candidate. Department teacher leads are expected to attended city-wide and borough-wide targeted professional learning opportunities and then turn-key the training to staff during our Monday professional development time. This from of distributive leadership allow teachers to engage in self-reflective and meta-cognitive practices. Teachers also engage in professional learning and track their professional growth on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Over the course of the school year teachers set professional goals aligned to specific components in the Framework and engage in a process of continuous feedback leveraging their classroom observation reports. We have also made a concerted effort to higher SPED teachers with dual certification to ensure the SPED teacher is also a content specialist. Our Program Chair has continually provided with training to ensure that teachers' licenses and expertise are aligned to their teaching assignment. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 40  The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. In addition, the staff has incorporated the use of school agendas, Cornell Notes, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, interdisciplinary units of study, and Common Core aligned units as they work to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The past school year we have procured IO Assessment to be our assessment management tool of choice. Teachers received on-going training on how to create and administered a assessment on the platform. This school year the expectation is that each question is linked to a standard to allow teachers and students to track progress by standard. To ensure teachers maximize the tool, IO Assessment will be linked to Skedula so that the results of the test is seamlessly transferred between platforms. Additionally, teachers will use PAD's to input their end of marking period grades instead of STARS Classroom. IO assessment, Skedula and PADS are all part of a suite of software that allows assessment and reporting process to be more efficient and user-friendly for teachers, students and parents. This school year IO assessment will be used to administer all common assessments which will be conducted at a minimum, one per marking period. Department teacher lead will provide on going pd on various data collections and reporting functions of IO assessments. 2018-19 CEP 41  We will continue to train teachers to engage in the data inquiry cycle to track students progress using multiple data sources. For example, we are currently tracking students progress in problem-solving skill in all subject area. Teachers will linked assessment questions to this skill and monitored students progress over time. These assessments include both formative and summative assessment that are varying format. Queens South FSC also provided to teachers strategies engage in the Inquiry Data Cycle by utilizing both Data Wise and LCI inquiry cycle models. The inquiry cycle model that will be used is fully driven by teachers including the choice of data points, methods of data collection and team analysis. Supervisors provide training to team leaders and teams on an on-going basis as they themselves conduct a meta-study of the inquiry teams. For example, the humanities inquiry team analyzed both regents results and unit baseline data panels in order to identify students learning gaps and teacher instructional gaps. The team determined the instructional tactic to be employed to promote student learning. The teacher team then determined three data points that will be collected to reveal insight on the effectiveness of the tactic. In this particular instance teachers agreed on collecting formative assessment data, teacher inter-visitation data and student perception of the tactic. Our inquiry cycle is a primary lever for closing both the teacher instructional gap as well as student achievement gap. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $137,824 $0 $0 $12,366 $3,179,494 X X X 2018-19 CEP 42 Column B Section Reference(s) X X X  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 43  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Epic High School South, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Epic High School South will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Seondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Epic High School South, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 47  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> English Language Learners will participate in an afterschool program that offers direct instruction in literacy, vocabulary development and test prep strategies using supplementary resources, Finishline. Finishline support ELL students by providing practice exercises on test taking strategies, conversational language development through interactive listening activities, academic development using reading passages and short answer responses based on visual text, oral responses and multiple choice answers. Academic intervention services will also be available using Performance Series web-based program. ENL teachers will alternate when attending Professional Development Opportunities offered by Queens South. ENL teachers will turn-key information and resources received from PD’s attended to Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Support staff during Tuesday Morning PD’s (8:05 am 8:50 am), once a month. At all Professional Development sessions, an agenda, minutes of the meeting, names and signatures of participates in attendance will be recorded, maintained in a ENL Professional Development Binder, and secured in the ENL Coordinators office. ENL Teachers will also attend webinars offered on DOE website and obtain certificates of attendance and placed in the ENL Professional Development Binder. As ENL Teachers attend on going Professional Development Opportunities and gain knowledge of best practices and effective strategies to address the language. In addition, an ENL committee meets weekly to monitor student academic progress and ensure ENL compliance matter are adhered to. On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 3:15 pm to 5:15 pm (2 hours), for a period of 23 weeks, a certified ESL teacher will work with 10 beginning to intermediate level ENL students in a Title III, Afterschool Program, focusing on reading comprehension, writing, vocabulary development, and test prep strategies. The instructional content will be provided in English to all students and supplementary resources in the format of technology (chromebooks) to translate written language other than English, Finishline workbooks to for English Proficiency practice and interactive ebooks. Attendance will be recorded for each participant at the beginning of each session and maintain in an Attendance Binder. Student progress will be assessed and monitored quarterly. Bi-Monthly ENL Performance Series web-based activities will also be utilized to support reading comprehension strategies and vocabulary development. The rationale being, the time during the school day in not sufficient to the close the achievement gap on literacy among ELL students. The additional 6 hours of literacy enrichment will help address the issue and target area of deficiency in Reading comprehension and writing skills necessary to increase NYSESLAT scores. Last year’s data revealed ENL students have shown a decline in scores in the modalities of Reading, Writing on the NYSESLAT. The modalities of Listening and Speaking continues to show steady progress. Based on that data results of the NYSESLAT in the areas Reading comprehension and Writing modalities have shown the need for a literacy enrichment program. It is our goal to support ENL to attain proficiency level in all modalities of the NYSESLAT and increase English Language Proficient for ENL students identified as and attain academic achievement in all CORE subjects areas. In the subgroup,s ENL students with IEP’s, NYSELAT results revealed minimal progress made. It is our goal to increase academic progress and language proficiency of ENL students with IEP’s performing at expanding levels to 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information commanding level. In addition to the afterschool enrichment programs offered, students receive push-in services from ENL teacher twice weekly. ENL students with IEP’s goals and modifications are closely monitored and assessed to ensure appropriate goals are implemented during IEP meetings. Teachers are providing specifically designed instruction to the students to ensure English proficiency is attained by the end of school year, as measured by teacher observations, on-going tracking and weekly informal assessments. ENL students are administered Performance assessment series bi-monthly and data analysis of students progress is measured. Based on the data results, teachers focus on their student's greatest academic need in content areas. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Professional Development is offered by Queens South Field Center and other professional organizations. The ENL Coordinator and the ENL teachers attends on going professional development workshops which they turnkey to staff members. Professional Development turnkey to staff have included; How to model and implement mental models for English Language Learners, How to differentiate content for SWD;s/ELL; Core subject teachers of Science and ELA also attended professional development offered by Queens south FSC that were specifically tailored towards Earth Science course (Earth Science) to improve ENL student’s vocabulary skills on content based science words/phrases. During Tuesday Morning PD’s (8:05 am 8:50 am), Bi monthly ENL workshops are provided to All Teachers, Guidance Counselors and support staff. At all Professional Development sessions, an agenda, minutes of the meeting, names and signatures of participates in attendance will be recorded, maintained in a ENL Professional Development Binder, and secured in the ENL Coordinators office. ENL Teachers will also attend webinars offered on DOE website and obtain certificates of attendance and placed in the ENL Professional Development Binder. As ENL Teachers attend on going Professional Development Opportunities and gain knowledge of best instructional practices that treat language and content in an integrated way that is designed to help build the language skills they need to succeed in content classes and college are career awareness. . In addition, the ENL committee meets weekly to monitor student academic progress and ensure ENL compliance mandates are adhered to. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement for ENL parents will be our key focus. Parents will engage in parent workshops from September though June. Parents will engage in various parent workshops, to support their child's development academically and social emotional needs and language proficiency Parents will receive translated critical school documents and notification informing parents of ELL students of upcoming events and workshops. During Parent Orientation meetings, parents of ELL students will receive translated surveys to complete in order to access areas of interest of workshop and/or topics interested in attending . ENL Parent Workshops will be coordinated with PTA meetings. Parent will receive comprehensive advisement on Academic curriculum, Post-Secondary topics and engage in College and career based activities. Meetings will be held during the 3nd Tuesday of each month, (5 pm – 6:30 pm).. Monthly College and Career Orientations will provide awareness and guidance on the College and Career Planning process. Parent Orientations will be hosted with translators to interpret information presented and distributed in languages as needed.others than English. Each month’s Parent Orientations that focus on specific Post-Secondary topics which includes, Understanding and Completing College Applications, Financial Aid Awareness, Career Exploration, Regents/SAT’s testing preparation strategies, Career Pathways, Resume Writing, Completing Employment applications, Parents will receive access to a tracking system to monitor their child progress towards meeting deadlines. Parent will also receive school-based assistance, during school hours, from School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and other support staff if unable to attend evening orientations. During evening Orientations sessions, ENL workshops will be presented by ENL Teachers, ENL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator. Invited members of Partnering Community Organizations offer an array of assistance to our ENL families on College Planning and seminars on how to prepare their child for post-secondary goals through interactive activities. Communications informing Parents of ENL students of school events, critical information, and parent meetings are interpreted via Phone Master Robo calls. Translated written notifications of school events , parent meetings and student's progress reports are provided for our parents. Pupil Path SMS system is utilized by teachers and staff members to maintain on-going parental outreach of students academic progress in preferred languages. Parent Coordinator send Weekly translated newsletters, electronically, in languages needed. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Will support the cost of ELL teacher along with before and after school programs Support the cost associated with professional development for the IEP teacher. Purchase of books, translation books and other resources. N/A N/A Parent workshops Total Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7419.6  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1236.6 $2473.20 0 0 $1236.6 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name EPIC High School south Borough Queens School Number 314 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Subhas Mohan Assistant Principal Clidege Pierre Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Barba Franklin Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Trudy-Ann Gordon Superintendent Elaine Lindsey School Counselor Trudy-Ann Gordon Parent Yvette Trossi Parent Coordinator Natalie Simmon Field Support Center Staff Member Laura Brown Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 334 2018-19 CEP 56 Total number of ELLs 32 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 2 0 3 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 11 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher created assessments, baseline, mid-line and end-line assessments that measures ELL students content of skills levels and guide instructional planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Classroom teachers provides explicit English language vocabulary embedding into the curriculum across all subject areas. Lessons and activities are implemented based on student's prior knowledge to increase comprehension. Writing activities are incorporated in every lesson to enhance vocabulary. Weekly enrichment classes are offered to support ENL learners identified as Emergent Language Learners. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 57  On going formative assessment data from Performance series, NYSESLAT, NYS Regents exam scores are used to support instruction a 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Heterogeneous and homogeneous groupings as needed. Provide instant voice capture translation, simplification and feedback. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, NYS Regents, Common Core Standards, Core subject baseline assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data analysis results from Nysitel, Nyseslat, baseline assessements, midterm, summative assessments from lessons designed from common core ELA curriculum Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Class placement in observance of credit requirements, ELL needs/ proficiency levels, heterogeneously homogeneously grouped according to the lesson plan and opportunities/needs. academic instruction is based on language proficiency levels, skills, needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit instructional ELA is delivered as follows: Beginners receive 540 hours, intermediate/emergent-360hrs, expanding-180hrs, proficient-90hrs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Scaffolding, text translation/representation, modeling, contextualization, reinforce new concepts introduced. Integrate concept across concept areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 58  Regents practice and summative tests are complemented by native language glossaries 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Provide each subgroups with alternative ways to access the content: e.g. provide focused academic skilled instruction to bridge the gaps of knowledge, gain insight of students interest, language and culture, provide glossaries in their first language, simplify text provided, and incorporate visuals, using charts, hands on activities and technology. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Ask comprehension check questions, use of visuals to illustrate the content, adjust instructional content to address the multitudes of skill levels and learning styles, incorporate flexible grouping and small group instruction. Translation of instructional content is provided for ELL-SWDs in languages other than English. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Flexible scheduling, extended time, scaffolding instruction. After school enrichment programs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Push-in ELL teacher to support, translate, simplify, scaffold new information presented by the teacher in class instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Schoolwide technology for curriculum and lesson translation. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are provided the opportunity to participate in school wide electiver that include but are not limited to classes like, economics, statistics, government participation, debates team, PSAT/SAT preparation, college and career readiness classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELL students are provided with electronic laptops to translate class & curriculum content in all academic areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Student are provide with translation materials in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All curriculum are embedded and designed to meet the students grade level and age appropriate development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENL Coordinator share resources and collaborate to 2018-19 CEP 59  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New student introduction program, summer bridge. Here, we empower new students and their parents to acclimate to our school culture and expectations. ELL students get to meet their teachers and their language needs are introduced. Parent coordinator and teachers provide these services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are provided the opportunity to participate in school wide electivers that include but are not limited to classes like, economics, statistics, government participation, debates team, PSAT/SAT preparation, college and career readiness classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development courses are made available to school ELL personnel through field service office, networks & doe 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL Teachers attend ongoing professional development and maintain record of attendance, agenda and hours of professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Ensure parents have access to IO/pupil path grading and communication system. provide information packets and newsletter. information resources is dissemination for participation in parent workshops, 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents received weekly newsletters and bulletins of events and activits. Awards ceremonies for academic achievement, student recognition for improvement and PTA meetings are held throughout the school years 2018-19 CEP 60  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Subhas Mohan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q314 School Name: EPIC High School-South Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Yadira Bascelic Vanessa Reed School Secretary ENL Compliance Coordinator Yes YES YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To determine and monitor language preferences of the parents in our school community, written and oral language preference data is collected from Initial intake registration forms, in the format of HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey), which provides information of the parents preferred language. We also use Initial Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) which specifies the preferred language parents wish to receive oral and written information from the school as well as the home language preferred to communicate orally with the EPIC staff. ATS RAPL report is generated and reviewed regularly to track the language preferences parents wish to receive school letters, correspondence and all other school generated information related to EPIC High School community. During the process of registration, Parents complete Emergency cards in their preferred language to obtain contact information and access the parent’s language preferences in the 2018-19 CEP 64  event of emergency. During open school night and Family Orientations, parents are provided with language Access Parent Surveys to gain insight of parents language preference access needs.. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French Hindi Madinka Punjabi Spanish Urdu Yoruba 2 24 1 5 0 16 61 0 2 0.58 6.39 95.26 0.29 1.45 0 17.72 0 0.58 2 24 1 5 2 16 61 1 2 0.58 6.39 95.26 1.45 0.58 4.65 17.72 0.29 0.58 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 65  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Notices,Letters, Flyers, Parent Surveys Ongoing throughout the school year School Calendar Sept Weekly Newsletter Weekly Student handbook Sept. Parent Notification Letters Ongoing throughout the school year Annual/Triennial IEP's Throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use T & I unit and contract vendor agency to translate letters. Parents will receive translated version in preferred language. Request for vendors are made 2-3 weeks prior to ensure translated version of notification are received timely. We can contract vendor agency to translate EPIC school calendar in other languages. We use T&I unit to translate newsletters to parents in their preferred language. -We use contract vendors to translate versions of Student handbook in languages other than English -We use T&I unit to translate parent notifications in other languages -We use bi-lingual staff members to interpret other languages and T&I unit for over-the-phone interpretation in parent's preferred language during IEP meetings. We contract DOE vendors to translate IEP in Parent's preferred language. Request for translation occur 2-3 weeks prior to scheduled IEP meeting. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Sept, Nov., March, May Student Led Conferences June Incoming 9th grade Orientation Monthly interpretation service(s)? We use Bi-lingual staff members, Over-the-phone interpretation services are also utilized. We use Bi-lingual staff members for interpretation of other languages, we 2018-19 CEP 66  PTA Meetings Every Tuesday -Parent Engagement -ELL Parent Orientation -Family Engagement Night Oct bring in on-site interpreters from DOE vendor agency We use Bi-lingual staff members for interpretation of other languages. -WE use Bilingual staff members for interpretation of parent’s preferred language and we use over-the-phone interpretation services. -We use Bi-lingual staff members for interpretation of other languages. We bring in on-site interpreters from DOE vendor agency. --We use Bi-lingual staff members to translate oral information presented and provide parents with written information translated in languages other than English. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Bi-lingual staff members are used to contact families via telephone in other languages. Robo phone calls made to parents and translated in other languages to informing them of a school emergency. We also use over-the phone interpretation services offered by the T&I unit to communicate information related to school emergency to parent in other languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Yearly professional development and training are provided by the Queens South FSC Field language Access Coordinator to the LAC, whom turn-key the information to all staff members at the beginning of the school year on the importance of ensuring parents who require language assistance are provided the opportunity to participate and access services, programs and resources available in they preferred language within the school community. On- going professional development opportunities are offered by the Queens South FSC for Administrators, teachers to attend. Achieve NYC posters, Interpretation and Translation Posters and Language Access Brochures are visibly located at the school entrance and main office. Parents Bill of Right and Responsibility is centrally located in the main office in other languages for distribution. Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities will also be disseminated during Parent Orientation and Family Night. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents receive Weekly newsletters, emails, phone calls, school letters/notifications and bulletins of events and activities that are translated in languages other than English. Over-the-phone notifications and invitations are sent home for parents to attend parent/teacher meetings, family-involve events, recognition ceremonies and a host of other activities provide by EPIC High School. All school notifications, letters and correspondences are provided to parents and translated and interpreted in the parent’s preferred language. ELL Parent participate in a host of workshops and meetings where they are actively engaged in the decision-making of their child’s education. A host of Parental Workshops are available for parent. They are as follows,limited to; Monthly PTA meetings, Student Led Conferences, Recognition of Achievement ceremonies, Parent Engagement and Family Night.; Bi-lingual staff members and on-site translators are brought in to interpret information/communication to parent during events. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We collect data from parent surveys to gather feedback during student led conferences, PTA meetings, and ELL’s Parent Engagement workshop. Based on information received from parent surveys, we plan to implement a welcome center for newly arrived parents to EPIC community to ensure parent are aware and knowledge about the resources and services available at EPIC High school and contracted agencies. . We also encourage Bilingual parents to become actively involved in the EPIC school community by training them to serve as ambassadors to newly arrived ELL parents and provide support and assistance to navigate successfully not only in within the school building but within the school community as well. 2018-19 CEP 68 
