2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q319 School Name: VILLAGE ACADEMY Principal: DORIS LEE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Village Academy 342700010319 6 -8 School Number (DBN): 27Q319 10-45 Nameoke Street, Far Rockaway, NY 11691 718-471-6042 Phone Number: 718-471-6243 Fax: Doris Lee Dlee9@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Doris Lee Austin Wolfson Ashley Moore Claire Bard Aarecelis Cabrera n/a n/a Victor Boamah District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 RockawayBlvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416. MBarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens (District 27, 28, 29) FSC: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7186425700 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Doris Lee Austin Wolfson Ashley Moore TenoraWhite KristalMiddleton N/A N/A N/A Michelle Perrone Claire Bard Jessica Toribio *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eric Moore Sr. Debbie Martin ArletheaMolina Judith Jackson Dad-lynnFlorestal Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to educate the entire child through high expectations in an inclusive and family-oriented school environment that ensures success in our students and improves our community. Vision 2018-19 CEP 9  All stakeholders will work collaboratively to ensure our students receive a rigorous curriculum, global exposure, and ongoing academic, social and emotional support. Every student will leave Village Academy equipped with the tools to a bright future as problem solvers, critical thinkers and efficient readers and communicators on their path to success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Instruction At Village Academy building leadership is one of our greatest strengths. We accelerate the learning process through training, professional development, and shared leadership. We have an Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) which meets weekly to ensure the alignment of curricula and instruction across all contents and grades. This team is charged with ensuring clear and accurate communication across the school as well as accountability amongst their colleagues. Through weekly e-mails, inter-visitations, common planning, and ongoing conversations the ILT works with each pedagogue to support in delivering effective instruction. Planning of professional development, instructional budgetary needs, and effectiveness of school programs along with the implementation of new programs are discussed and vetted at ILT. They turn-key of important information to their teams which garners buy-in and supports to ensure consistency. The impact is a culture of shared leadership, staff buy-in, consistency of instructional practices, ongoing professional development, and shared best practices. Another best practice at Village Academy is our real-world tasks that allow students to explore careers, problems in the world, society, and their communities, as well as take action through authentic writing pieces. We implemented a full STEM program where students explore biology, engineering, They have also explored careers around engineering, medicine, biology, science, advertisement, entrepreneurship, and a host of others through real-world tasks. The impact is that our students realize they have voice, power and rights. They are also prepared for high school and college and have strong ideas about possible careers of interest. One of our most effective practices is the use of technology. We utilize technology to engage and differentiate instruction. Through the creative use of Mobymax, Blogging, Google Classroom, ST Math, MYON, QR Scan codes, Show Me, Air Server, Videos, NewsELA, Prezi, Apple TV, and a host of other programs students are provided with access to the curriculum at all levels along with ongoing assessment feedback and academic supports. The impact is that all learners have access to the curriculum. Students are assessed in a variety of modes that allow for deeper understanding of what students really know. Students are also prepared for the 21 st century by learning how to use technology to present ideas. We also provide a unique schedule that provides an individualized schedule and education to each student. Students receive ongoing feedback and individualized instruction with the use of technology. Our advisory and mastery program allow students to build connections with multiple adults in our school community using restorative circles. Students partake in the arts, cooking, technology, and a host of other electives led by teachers. We believe in educating the entire child. 2018-19 CEP 10  Finally, this year we delved deeply into the work of cultural proficiency. Through professional learning communities, book clubs, professional development and ongoing dialogue we developed a community that closely examines their beliefs about children and family to ensure that every student is supported in reaching their full potential. We provide a restorative community with a culturally proficient curriculum that allows all students access to STEM and text that represents a multitude of cultures. Teachers use research and reflective practices to develop individual plans of success for each student focusing on their strengths as leverage to close gaps. Programs and Special Initiatives Village Academy is able to consistently develop partnerships with the community to provide our students with ample opportunities for success. We partnered with the NYPD to increase literacy and community relations. We also partnered with the YMCA to provide an expanded day for our students. We are also participants of several NYC initiatives including the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), the District-Charter Collaborative (DCC) and Teacher Leader development. We are also a restorative practices school and focus more on the proactive approaches to behavior versus the traditional reactive and punitive model. We are part of the Algebra for All, Hunter Math scholars program and the College Access for All initiative. Each year our students visit colleges around city, state and country and develop college success plans that include college essays. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special student populations and what their specific needs Village Academy has been able to consistently meet the needs of our special populations including English as a new language (ENL) and students with disabilities (SWD). With a large population of both ENL and SWD Village Academy provides a unique individualized program for each student that includes academic and social and emotional learning. Teachers are trained in effective professional development strategies and students are provided with access to rigorous grade level content using scaffolds and differentiation strategies. Teachers work collaboratively to write quality individualized education plans. Teachers are given specific professional development in instructional practices that utilize ongoing and precise analysis of data which occurs weekly in grade team and content area meetings. School leaders have allocated funding for additional planning in which teachers collaboratively write curricula and develop pacing calendars, units, and assessment designed to engage students in the lowest third of the population in terms of proficiency. With the data, students are placed in differentiated cohorts that take into account their individual literacy and math levels and assist teachers in supporting students’ individual academic needs. Ninety-eight percent of our students are Black (78%) and/or Hispanic (20%) with lunch applications that indicate a qualifying percentage of students at an income level for free or reduced lunch. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress 2018-19 CEP 11  Teachers are engaged in very collaborative work since September, beginning with the Professional Learning Communities, where teachers divided into groups of 5-7 with a lead teacher or administrative facilitator and studied articles and books pertaining to components 3b, 3c, and 3d of Domain 3 (Instruction) of the Danielson Rubric. Each week teams met to discuss instructional initiatives decided upon based on the individual readings and data from student work. A share out of the results of the implemented idea brought about a continued conversation and a refinement of teaching practice for all members. Our teachers also participate in weekly common planning where they plan rigorous instruction, review student work using research-based protocols, and develop and analyze common assessments. This continues to be an area with great progress. We were also able to use this area to launch our work around cultural proficiency which supported improvement in Domain 2 of Danielson. Effective School Leadership is another area of strength and progress. Every teacher had an opportunity to turn-key effective strategies or spearhead their own initiative. Finally, one area where we made the greatest progress is supportive environments. Through a commitment to develop a restorative school community our teachers participated in professional development, book clubs, and ongoing conversations. The result was a drastic decrease in suspensions and an increase in student engagement. Key Area of Focus One Key area of focus is rigorous instruction. Although, we do provide rigorous instruction to all students through meaningful text, technology, real-world problem solving, and a robust STEM curriculum we want to focus on consistency across all classrooms. As our school continues to grow and we add additional teachers to meet the demand of our expanding school we will need to focus on providing professional development and support to accelerate the on the job learning of our newer teachers to ensure that they are able to consistently provide rigorous instruction. We are also focusing on widening our knowledge on the needs of our ENL population which is also rapidly growing and ensuring that every teacher is an expert at providing meaningful instruction to the wide variety of diverse learners represented in all of our classes. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q319 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 359 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 79.9% % Reduced Lunch 17.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 39.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 61 61 92.0% 1.7% 21.7% 56.3% 1.1% 1.1% 2 59% 5.9 8.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our most recent Quality Review, as well as the feedback received during our Principal Performance Observations, Rigorous Instruction remains an area of focus. This year our instructional focus was for teachers to “develop deeper-thinking questions, and use various discussion protocols, to promote student thinking and understanding and engage them in challenging and important content”. In all content areas we did professional development on the use of discussion protocols to facilitate learning through academic discourse. In the 2017 NYC school survey the score for “Quality of Student Discussion” was 2.63 with 67% positive responses. In the 2018 NYC School Survey we see an increase in score of 3.5 with 73% positive responses. In our ADVANCE ratings we noticed that 13 out of 18 returning teachers either improved or had the same rating in Danielson 3B. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to keep Danielson’s Component 3B an instructional focus for the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Village Academy teachers will support the learning of all groups of students including ELLs and students with disabilities. This will be evident by 85% of teacher being rated effective and highly effective in Danielson's Component 1e and 3b. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New Teachers Entire school year on a weekly basis from 9/18 to 6/19 PLC groups, ILT members, New teacher mentors, subject leaders, Coaches Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). New teachers with less than years experience and teachers with a rating of less than effective will receive ongoing individualized professional development based on their needs as identified by Danielson Ratings and ongoing observations. Professional development will include ENL and differentiation strategies to meet the needs of special populations. Teachers will participate in an ongoing Professional Learning Community dedicated to Danielson Domains 1 and 3 where they will utilize our video protocol and lesson plan review protocol to assess their effectiveness. The PLC will take place weekly as part of common planning. Each teacher will develop individual goals of improvement. The student work protocol will focus on students from key sub-groups including ENL and SWD. The instructional leadership team will work to develop the shared lesson plan template to be utilized by all teachers. They will ensure there are guided questions to support in effective planning in implementation. The instructional leadership team will provide professional development and support in the use of the template during common planning and Monday professional development time. All teachers Entire Teachers School year on a weekly basis from 9/18- 6/19 Entire school year on a bi-weekly basis from 9/18 to 6/19 All Teachers Weekly from 9/18 to 6/19 Weekly from 9/18 to 6/19. Every 3 months from 9/18 to 6/19 Instructional Leadership Team and teaching staff Instructional Leadership Team and teaching staff Instructional Leadership Team Administration, PLC's Teacher leaders and administration Lead Teachers, coaches, partners, administration. Regular walk-through and observations to ensure implementation of feedback Teachers Data analysis on a bi-weekly based check via Skedula Teachers will participate in quarterly reflection meetings to track their progress in Domain 1 and 3 of Danielson based on their ongoing feedback Teachers Village Academy will leverage work with the District Charter School Partnership program, MSQI, Teacher Leadership Pathways, and Teacher Development units to support teachers in Domain 1 and 3 of Danielson Teachers Ongoing from 9/18 to 6/19 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in monthly CCLS instructional workshop to support their understanding of rigorous instruction aligned to the CCLS standards. The parent workshops will occur primarily during parent time allotted on Tuesdays. The workshops will be developed by our Instructional Leadership Team and our subject-area teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to meet this goal we will use our partnerships with Learning Partners, Teacher Leadership Pathways, and the Teacher Development unit along with our new RAAD grant offered by MSQI to support teachers through ongoing individualized professional development. We will also use or weekly professional development time to participate in professional learning communities around Domain 1a, 1e, 3b and 3d and develop action plans using the cycle of inquiry. We will use current research and student data and feedback to adjust our curriculum and instructional practices. We will also use our model teacher and peer collaborative teachers to support their colleagues. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We expect that 75% of teachers will be effective in Component 1e by the end of February 2019 as identified by Advance ratings. We will evaluate the reflections teacher's wrote from of their ratings on a quarterly basis. Advance will be used to monitor progress in Component 1e and 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Danielson Advance Rating NYC School Survey Teacher and Student Reflections Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Village Academy has a strength in providing a safe learning environment almost all (88%) of our students reported being safe on the NYC School Survey while close to 90% of students reported having their social-emotional needs met. We implemented restorative practices a with a focus on proactive and restorative practices. We boast a robust advisory program where each student and family is known well by at least one adult but in many cases multiple adults. All of our teachers participate in ongoing professional development around cultural proficiency, restorative practices, and R.U.L.E.R a social-emotional philosophy developed by YALE. At Village Academy we realize the importance of building strong relationships. Our priority rest in meeting the needs of our students who have experienced trauma by ensuring that our new teachers are equipped with the tools necessary to build relationships with our students and address all of our students needs and concerns. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 our overall rating for Supportive Environment as measured by the School Quality Guide will increase from 79% to 85%. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development for all staff around Restorative practices and student goal setting during advisory. Participation in citywide initiatives and other grants such as RULER to support staff with the implementation of restorative practices All staff Observations of Advisory along with ongoing feedback Teachers Ongoing for the school year from 8/18 to 6/19 Partnership with Morning side and IIRP teacher leaders and administration Ongoing for the school Administrator Each student will lead their own conference to share with the school community and their families their progress, goals, and plan for improvement at least once for the year. Teachers, students and families Ongoing for the school year Teachers and administration and parent coordinator Students and teachers will use Google Classroom as a tool for students to provide peer to peer feedback Teachers and students Village Academy will develop a school culture team that will monitor and improve the culture and school climate through walk throughs, surveys, observations, professional development, and ongoing communication with the larger school community. Our entire school community Ongoing for the school year Ongoing for the school year Teachers Teachers, parents, counselor, parent coordinator, adminsitration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be trained as part of ongoing parent workshops on restorative practices. These trainings will be delivered by our guidance counselor and school social worker. Parents will also have the opportunity to review peer feedback provided to their child as well as student created goals through our Skedula and Pupilpath portal our parent coordinator will host workshops to familiarize parents with both platforms. Parents will also participate in student-led conferences during parent time led by students and facilitated by student advisors and subject area teachers. Finally parents will have the opportunity participate in our school culture team led by our school dean and assistant principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our time and schedule to provide students with advisory periods. We will also provide meeting time for teacher teams and the school climate team to meet. Finally we will invest in smaller class sizes to ensure students are known well. We will also employ a guidance counselor and social worker to support students and their families as 2018-19 CEP 18  part of our mission and visions. We will utilize services provided by North shore clinic housed in our building and continue to partner with community based organizations to provide ongoing social and emotional support to our students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will do a mid-year survey to review student, staff, and parent responses. We will compare to our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey to monitor progress and areas of growth. We will also re-visit this goal and data such as attendance, suspensions, and teacher anecdotals with our culture team and our SLT. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use surveys, referrals, anecdotal data, attendance, suspension data and observations to track progress towards this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our continued strengths as a school is our collaborative teacher teams and distributive leadership, which is the way we ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to inform planning, we will use an interactive curriculum with pacing calendars, units, and daily lesson plans driven by data. The data is based on our Quality Review feedback where we received a Well-Developed for our collaborative teacher teams, which include reflective dialogue, peer collaboration and collective responsibility. Our School Quality Guide reveals that we exceeded our targets in this area. Our area for growth continues to be ensuring that planning addresses all student goals tailored to their strengths and needs, in order to foster student participation. We will employ multiple entry points and knowledge of students’ varied experiences by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g. screening interim measures and progress monitoring). This will remain our focus until we are able to meet the individual needs of EACH and EVERY student we teach. This element is especially important as our school and teaching staff grows and we work to ensure that all teachers are equipped to meet the high expectations set forth by Village Academy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in a professional learning community which will result in an increase of teacher commitment as evidenced by our School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Include inquiry-based meetings (data driven) that include data analysis that informs and verifies the refinement of practices. Use common planning to implement student work protocol and share best practices. Specifically, an emphasis on student work stations that provide differentiation and take into student learning styles and preferences. Inter-visitations, instructional videos and debriefs Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ELL’s, SWD’s Ongoing for the school year fro 9/18 to 6/19 All students Ongoing for the school year fro 9/18 to 6/19 Administration, teacher leaders (PIC’s and DT’s) teachers Administration, teachers & content area leaders All teaching staff Ongoing for the school year fro 9/18 to 6/19 Administration, PCT's, teachers, guidance counselors, social worker Set a school-wide norm with clear expectations for student responsibility for learning. All teaching staff Teachers will use the mood-meter and journal writing to document how they feel through out the year. We will also utilize restorative circles to provide a safe environment for teachers to express their feelings and concerns as we move through the eb and flow of the school year. Teachers Ongoing for the school year fro 9/18 to 6/19 Ongoing for the school year Administration, PCT's, teachers Lead Teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During SLT parents will have the opportunity to assess progress towards this goal. Parent to teacher collaboration will be supported by bi-weekly communications that will be initiated and or logged using our on parent communication online platform. The parent coordinator will monitor communications and support parents and teachers as needed in two-way communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  We will leverage the relationships we have developed with our TEA (Teacher Effectiveness Ambassador) to help with the inquiry process and grow in our ability to utilize instructional protocols to engage students and increase levels of effectiveness for teaching as evidenced by the Danielson Framework. We will leverage the ample amounts of technology (Ipads, MacBooks, PC’s) that we have to engage students in classes and facilitate teacher communication, dissemination of information via online software (Google Docs, Google Drive, et. Al) for the purpose of tracking progress toward established instructional goals. We will leverage our strength of teacher collaboration to continue to discuss and analyze data, trends, new initiatives, weak areas and concerns expressed during common planning meeting. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will provide teachers with a beginning and middle of the year survey to monitor their commitment. We will also have weekly check-ins using the mood-meter during our weekly meetings. We will see an increase in MOTP ratings on individual feedback forms with at least 75% of teachers showing trends of improvement and growth indicating a closer realization of the goal. We will have a record of at least 5 pieces and sessions of feedback and correlating teacher lesson plans that demonstrate a trend toward the more effective designing of coherent instruction. Instructional tasks and student work will demonstrate an overall improvement in lesson plans and thoughtful execution of learning standards based upon student data and best practices. This improvement will be evidenced by an increase in the improvement of students' weekly quiz scores, specifically a 10% increase for the assessed standards on the quiz. The three benchmarks will be visible by February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use Danielson ratings, meeting agenda and notes, observations, and teacher feedback to monitor progress towards this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by a QR rating and the Framework for Great School report we are rated “Excellent “in Effective School Leadership. Effective school leadership continues to be a strength during the 2018-2019 with a rating that exceeded our schools target. Village Academy boasts a community of trust and collective efficacy. Our school leader makes strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human and fiscal capital. Our school program allows for ongoing teacher collaboration horizontally and vertically. Each grade team has two leaders who are able to keep open lines of communication and support student learning as it aligns to our mission and vision. We also provide targeted and individualized professional development through in-house and outside sources. We boast a robust technology program that allows students to use a multitude of devices to expand their learning. Our school mission and vision is clear and translates into our community partnerships that enable the school to meet the academic and social needs of all students (i.e. The YMCA ,Expanded ED, MSQI, Drama Therapy, Ladies with Purpose, Gentlemen’s Club, etc.). The NYC School Survey reports that 100% of teachers believe that leadership communicates a clear mission, vision and clear expectations. The focus will be to continue to nurture the professional growth of teachers by improving our system of inter-visitation, peer teacher coaching to develop stronger instructional and social-emotional practices that result in increased student achievement. We want to increase our teacher rating of teacher influence which is the only indicator that does not exceed the city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2018-2019 all teachers will participate in a key teacher-team around instruction and climate and we will develop clear systems to capture and monitor teacher influence which will result in a 5 percentage point increase of positive ratings for teacher influence as evidenced ny our NYC School Survey/ School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ensure teachers are staffed in leadership roles using the LPP program and Teacher Career Pathways along with other leadership opportunities Staff, VA Hiring Committee ongoing professional development and leadership support instructional staff Clear schedule, systems, protocols, and procedure for inter-visitations Instructional staff Individualized professional development for staff based on inter-visitation reflections and debriefs Instructional staff Development and maintenance of a Google Drive to capture agendas and teacher decisions and outcomes from teacher teams and input. Instructional Staff Principal, School Cabinet, ExpandEd Director School leadership, Teachers, Parent coordinator School leadership, teacher leaders School leadership, teacher leaders Administration and lead teachers Ongoing for the school year fro 9/18 t0 6/19 Through out the school year from 9/18 - 6/19 Through out school year from 9/18 - 6/19 Through out school year from 9/18 - 6/19 Through school year from 7/18 -6/19 Needs assessment completed by teachers and development of teacher teams to address needs identified Instructional Staff 8/18 -10/18 Administration and lead teachers. Weekly teacher team meetings and action plan development Weekly instructional leadership team meetings Instructional staff Instructional staff 10/18 - 6/19 All staff Through out school year from 9/18-6/19 Teachers, teacher leaders, administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 24  During the September Family Night parents will participate in a workshop which will review the Framework for Great Schools and our status in each of the elements of the Framework. As part of the SLT parents will have an opportunity to support in the monitoring of the goals through ongoing updates. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize our Monday and Tuesday time for teachers to meet in these problem-solving and decision-making teams. There will be a leverage of our technological resources and the collaborative team-building culture we have established to achieve the strategies above and maintain a consistent execution of listed strategies. We will use the existing leaders that have been established to help ensure a cohesive operation across the grade and content areas. The school schedule will include time set aside for teaching staff to meet as a grade and content area to develop in using information gathered from classroom instruction to drive next steps for student progress. We will utilize our schedule to allow for meaningful inter-visitations between teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 all teachers will participate in a problem-solving team to support instruction, climate, and culture at Village Academy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting agendas, goal monitoring by team, google drive documents, attendance, survey, suspensions, Danielson, and weekly check-ins with teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Village Academy boast an open door policy where parents are welcomed and encouraged to visit, advocate, communicate, or just observe our school and classes. We utilize several modes of communications including e-mails, phone-blast, mailing and bi-weekly phone calls from advisors and subject area teachers. This year we saw an increase in student engagement and a decrease in off-task behavior when parents had an opportunity to volunteer in our school community and share a passion, skill, or other meaningful ways. Our priority is to expand this effective practice of differentiating parental involvement so that each parent feels like they can support their child's education by volunteering remotely or in person at the school. We want every parent to be empowered to support in a way they and their child can feel proud. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of parents would have had the opportunity to volunteer in our school community as evidenced by an increase in our Strong Family - Community Ties rating on the School quality guide from meeting target to exceeding target. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create parent polls to discover, assess and respond to parent concerns. Parents Multilingual modes of communication in addition to English (Spanish, French, Creole, Bengali) Parents & Families Office IPad mounts for easy access to student information, school events, initiatives, and information about workshops, training sessions, etc. Parents and visitors Parents Pupil Path communications with parents will be monitored and ensure that the communication is thorough and culturally relevant (translated and with parent preferences derived from surveys taken into consideration). We will also offer ongoing classes and workshops for families to learn and use the online software Village Academy will provide a schedule to allow parents multiple opportunities to participate in a student led conference. Village Academy will provide monthly instructional workshops led by teachers where parents will have the opportunity to come in and participate in a CCLS aligned task or lesson that will support their understanding in the expectations of the CCLS as well as how they can support at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, ILT, cabinet members, & teachers, SLT Administration, ILT, cabinet members, & teachers Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/189 Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/189 Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/19 Administration, office staff and the Technology Coordinator Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/19 Administration, ILT, cabinet members, & teachers Parents, students, and teachers Parents and teachers Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/19 Ongoing for the school year from 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, parent coordinator Teachers, ILT, parent coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Village Academy will provide monthly instructional workshops led by teachers where parents will have the opportunity to come in and participate in a CCLS aligned task or lesson that will support their understanding in the 2018-19 CEP 27  expectations of the CCLS as well as how they can support at homeVillage Academy will provide monthly instructional workshops led by teachers where parents will have the opportunity to come in and participate in a CCLS aligned task or lesson that will support their understanding in the expectations of the CCLS as well as how they can support at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage our technological resources to communicate with parents in their primary language the information about their children’s academic expectations and progress. We will use our technology coordinator to organize and place computers in strategic locations for parents to easily access the translated material. We will use staff members that speak the target language to help with the translations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 50% of our parents would have participated in our school community by volunteering their time or expertise. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will monitor invitations, grade-wide events, climate team agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Analysis of state exam data, DRP, results quiz, diagnostic/baseline and formative assessments. Mathematics Science Class grades TeacherRecommendation Analysis of state exam data, quiz, diagnostic/baseline and formative assessments. Class grades TeacherRecommendation Analysis of state exam data, quiz, diagnostic/baseline and formative assessments. Class grades TeacherRecommendation Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups, one-to-one, and tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before, during and after school or during intervention/advisory periods Small groups, one-to-one, and tutoring Before, during and after school or during intervention/advisory periods Small groups, one-to-one, and tutoring Before, during and after school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) In order to ensure alignment of our curriculum to the CCLS our literacy teachers adapted the Expeditionary Learning curriculum to meet the needs of our students. Strategic Reading is also taught across content area to increase literacy proficiency. Math teachers adapted the CMP3 curriculum and integrated other CCLS material. Strategic Reading is also taught across content area to increase literacy proficiency Science and Humanities received support from a Teaching Matters Consultant who supported the integration of technology and Higher Order thinking skills into their curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 29  Social Studies Analysis of DRP data and literacy proficiency levels TeacherRecommendation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP data, disciplinary data, conversations with parents, students Science and Humanities received support from a Teaching Matters Consultant who supported the integration of technology and Higher Order Thinking skills into their curriculum. Reading, games, interaction, parent meetings, regular counseling sessions (mandated and non-mandated). Small groups, one-to-one, and tutoring Before, during and after school. One-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 23 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, school supplies, tutoring, extended learning opportunities Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We plan to continue our partnership with the NYC Teaching Fellows to recruit and hire teachers in the necessary license area. Currently our teachers facilitate workshops with the NYC teaching fellows and we have several interning teachers. We plan to continue to reach out to local colleges and hold open houses for high needs license areas such as special education, math and science. We plan to continue to provide professional development and leadership opportunities to retain our Highly Qualified Teachers. We will use social media to brand, communicate, and recruit highly qualified teachers and communicate our hiring fair events. We are working to build additional partnerships with educational institutions to support internships and recruitment in addition to the NYC Teaching Fellow. Moreover, we will continue the effective practices learned as part of the NYC pilot for effective practices around around branding, recruiting, hiring and retaining highly qualified staff including our interview and new teacher committee. The committee jointly created a rubric for interviewing and assessing potential candidates for open teaching positions. Distributed leadership is employed (Grade Team Leaders, Content Area Leaders, Peer Instructional Coach, and Demonstration Teachers) to ensure that teachers are able to participate in decisions. Professional 2018-19 CEP 33  development is within the school on a weekly basis. Teachers are also invited to seek out professional development opportunities outside of school or to engage in inter-visitation with colleagues to become more effective instructors. Teacher of the month and other rewards are given to teachers to celebrate best practices and inspire others to achieve a high level performance. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Village Academy several partnerships to provide ongoing differentiated professional developments around rigorous instruction and the Common Core standards. Our partnerships include Urban Advantage, MSQI, RAAD, LPP, Teacher Effectiveness units, Hunter Fellows in mathematics, and algebra for all. We also have several teacher leaders including peer collaborative teachers and mentor teachers that provide individualized support including modeling of effective strategies and planning. We developed an individualized professional development program for each teacher using our multiple partnerships and teacher leaders. As part of Urban Advantage our students participate in ongoing real-world science activities and excursions to prepare them for high school, college, and careers in science. We have secured several grants and partnerships to allow access to the curriculum to all of our students including MSQI, Teacher Effectiveness Ambassadors (TEA), Teacher Recruitment and Retention, and Showcase Schools. This year we also hosted a Professional Learning Community Symposium to share best practices with other schools. All participating schools left with materials and resources they could use to implement technology, differentiation, and real-world tasks in their classrooms. We will continue to provide teachers and staff with professional development in the use of the technology, wherein they will have the opportunity to incorporate the new training into classroom practices and share what they are learning in subsequent PD. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 34  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At Village Academy we have an Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) which is comprised of two lead math teachers, two lead literacy teachers, one lead humanities teacher and one lead science teacher. One math lead and one literacy lead is special education. ILT facilitates common planning, vets common assessments and curriculum, analyzes student data, leads professional development, sends weekly update e-mails, facilitates inter-visitation, develops instructional documents with their teams, and ensures consistency and coherency across their subject and school wide. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 192,843.00 0 12,366 1,856 2,664,094.00 X x X x X Section 5 a - 5d sections 5a-5d Sections 5a - 5c sections 5a-5c Sections 5a - 5d 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 36  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Village Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Village Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Village Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 40  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Village Academy has a rapidly growing ENL population and a wide range of students. This school year we are projected to have 2 ENL certified teachers to support our ENL students. One teacher being certified in both a ELA and ENL licenses. Our dually certified ELA/ENL teacher will service our Expanding and recent Commanding ENL students through their ELA period. Our other ENL teacher will support our Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students through a push-in and pull-out model. Based on state exam data and cumulative data our students making rapid growth from entering to transitioning but have difficulties moving to commanding. Our 2016-2017 NYSESLAT data were (*Level 1 - 0 - 0%, Level 2 -18 - 31%, Level 3 - 8 - 14%, Level 4 - 23 - 39%, Level 5 - 10 - 17%) We want to double our level Level 3 and Level 4, and 5 students by the end of the school year. We plan to support in this area with a after school program. Based on data our after school program will focus on building the skills of our transitioning students to move them to expanding and ultimately commanding. Our after school program will work with all transitioning ENL students from 6, 7, and 8th grades. The weekly schedule for this program will be each Tuesday through Friday from 2:30 PM to 4:00 PM. The program will focus on both math and literacy skills and a team of teachers including math content, ELA content and our ENL teacher will work together with the integration of technology, online programs, structure reading and math programs to support the progress of our transitioning students. We will use, Go Math extensions, Moby Max multi-subject online program, ST Math online program, REWARDS reading program, as well as individualized lessons from i-Ready and teacher developed materials. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All content teachers who service our ENL students will receive ongoing professional development turn-keyed by our ENL teacher who will attend borough-wide ENL professional development. Teachers will learn how to integrate effective ENL strategies into the lesson such as the use of cognates, pictures, vocabulary strategies, and discussion protocols. We will use One Monday professional development day each month for a total of 9 days and the entire election day to deliver ENL PD to the entire staff. The times of PD will be from 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. We will also work with T-equipment to support in using technology effectively for our ENL students. The professional development turn-keyed by ENL teachers will occur monthly on Monday's. T-equipment will provide 4 PD days geared towards all content teachers. Each T-equipment PD will be a full day. Teachers will have 45 minute trainings. Our Title III program 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development teachers will also participate in the District Charter Collaborative bi-weekly PD and once a month school inter-visitations. This meeting will take place every other Thursday from 3:00 to 5:00 p.m. The PD will positively impact our ENL students through them moving one or more levels on the NYSESLAT as well as showing progress on our three benchmarks examination administered throughout the school year. All agendas and attendance sheets will be kept by our secretary and an electronic version will be kept in Google Drive for all staff to access. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We engage our ELL parents through monthly workshops and activities as they relate to the curriculum, grades, portfolios, promotion, and the ELL identification process. We also use our weekly parent time on Monday afternoon to conduct meetings with students. This is done in order to help our parents support their children as they receive ELL support in order to increase their oral, written, speaking, and listening skills in English. It is our hope to also bridge the language barrier for our parents as well. We have a book club once per month which provides the book that students are reading in class in their native language. The PA Vice President, our parent volunteers facilitate the book club assisted by Ms. Mancebo who supports Spanish speaking parents. These meetings take place the 2nd Tuesday of each month, at 4:00 PM. During our monthly PTA meetings, which take place the third Thursday of each month, Ms. Mancebo also translates for Spanish speaking parents. The school provides open parent-teacher conferences during each semester which are published on the school calendar. All written communication is translated and mailed home, and appears in the school calendar, website, am and pm PA announcements, flyers, and letters. All materials are relayed in the family’s home language. Our parents utilize the translation hotline. Our families have access to their child’s progress through Pupil Path which allows them to communicate with all of their teachers. We also have provided many of our families with internet, hotspots to support our students with online access for their assignments. Additionally, Ms. Mancebo informs parents of student progress once per month. Topics covered thus far: CCLS, extracurricular activities to support ELLs, applications to support the ELLS, use of bilingual dictionaries in the home, strengthening the home-school connection, computer training, and job-hunting skills. Our records such as agendas, attendance sheets and parent invitations will be maintained by our parent coordinator and translated into our families preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 46 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 0  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a N/A n/a 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Village Academy Borough Queens School Number 319 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Doris Lee Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Johanna Mancebo Teacher/Subject Area Ashley Cruz Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Tynisa Martin Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Joherra Harris Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Kiszia Simmons Parent Ms. Aracelis Cabrerra Parent Coordinator Kimberly Copper Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 338 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 61 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.05%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For formative assessments we administer the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment to identify students' reading levels in September for all of our Emerging, Transitioning and Commanding students. These students are assessed throughout the school year in the Winter (January) and also in the Spring (May). All subject area teachers are able to use student reading levels to guide their instructional planning for ELL students specifically in the selection of class texts, independent reading book selections for classroom libraries and groupings of students. We use several curriculum embedded assessments such as teacher created assessments as well as assessments on the online programs Moby Max and Reading Plus. These assessments allow teachers to differentiate based on the needs of each student and to measure progress on an on-going basis. In Mathematics students are assessed using the online programs Moby Max, Tenmarks and ST Math. All subject area teachers utilize mid and end of unit assessments and culminating tasks throughout each unit of study in alignment with our CCLS curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 49  Each week during Common Planning our teachers as apart of our instructional plan are required to look closely at the ELL sub-group data which includes weekly reading assessments, mid and end of unit assessments. Teachers use this data to make instructional adjustments. This revealed that the majority of our ELL students are at-risk scoring below grade level in reading. We are addressing our ELL students reading difficulties through our strategic reading literacy block. Our instructional plan includes reading intervention based on the needs of our students. Students who need basic word recognition, spelling and phonics receive instruction in a 12:1 ratio using the Wilson Program Just Words, this program is for students who are far below reading level. For students who are below grade level we use the REWARDS and Imagine learning program which are phonics programs to help students identify high frequency academic vocabulary and pronunciation. Students who are on-level participate in book groups. Students also receive support with math fluency and basic computation during the math block. Based on our baseline data our teacher teams identified that ELL students were struggling with vocabulary and reading comprehension. Each week during Common Planning our teachers as apart of our instructional plan are required to look closely at the ELL sub-group data which includes weekly reading assessments, mid and end of unit assessments. Teachers use this data to make instructional adjustments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We use horizontal and vertical grade and subject area teacher teams to frequently communicate about assessment data and for curriculum planning and adjustments. Our ENL certified teacher is included in these meetings. Each week during Common Planning our teachers as apart of our instructional plan are required to look closely at the ELL sub-group data which includes weekly reading assessments, mid and end of unit assessments. Teachers use this data to make instructional adjustments. Teachers use both the online programs Skedula./Datacation and Google Classroom/Drive to share assessment data on our ELL students. Each grade team and subject area team has teachers who are apart of our instructional leadership team which meets once a week with the administrative team. During this meeting decisions are made about selection of assessments, assessment dates, and curriculum adjustments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In September we administer the ELL Periodic Baseline Assessment that assesses all ENL students using the criteria from the NYSESLAT Targets of Measure rubric in Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. Students then are administered the ELL Periodic Assessment Benchmark in March to assess their progress. In Mathematics students take the Math Periodic Assessment (baseline in September and benchmarks in January and in June.) Students take the ELA NYC Performance Task in September to measure writing which is used by teachers to support in goal setting and scaffolds. In May all ENL students take the NYSESLAT examination. Our Instructional Leadership team analyzes all of the summative data and subject area baseline assessments to ensure that all ELL students are receiving the necessary supports. We use progress monitoring systems such as Datacation and Schoolnet after the administration of the DRP and Periodic Assessment baselines and benchmarks. We then make adjustments to our instruction and made class changes to meet student's needs. Through weekly team meetings teachers discuss methods and practices to differentiate in supporting academic development within instruction, while aligning to common core standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once our teacher teams analyze all of the data we support students with small group instruction during the before school, after school and during lunch periods. We also have a daily Strategic Reading period during the school day which allows our ENL teacher to pull students in a small group setting to provide support with reading comprehension and phonemic awareness skills. During this period our ENL teacher uses our Spanish bilingual paraprofessional to support our Entering and Emerging students with phonics and language acquisition. For our Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students our ENL teacher uses Word Generation a research based cross curriculum program to support with academic language. Our ENL teacher works closely with our subject area teacher to provide them with strategies for our ENL students such as a list of cognates that aligns with units of study and appropriate scaffolds. All resources and curriculum are shared among all teachers through our 2018-19 CEP 50  Google Drive folders allowing teachers to access this material on a as needed basis. This sharing of curriculum allows our ENL teacher to preview vocabulary and content with our ENL students prior to a subject area launching a lesson or unit of study. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our Response to Intervention plan for all students is built into the school day through our daily AIS strategic reading and math periods. All ENL students receive stand alone ENL as a part of our AIS period. During these periods students in small groups (groups of 10 or less) receive targeted reading instruction using research based programs such as Reading Plus and Moby Max. Students are placed in each class based on the New York State ELA scores, NYSESLAT score and item analysis reports from the previous year and the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment which identifies students Lexile and grade reading level. We also use the data from the AMAO tool as well as the results from the NYSELAT to identify at risk students. Students take the DRP exam in September, January and May in order to make class changes to meet the needs of our students. Our strategic reading program supports our SIFE students and literacy needs of our long term ELLS as well as our entering ELLs. In strategic math students were administered a diagnostic examination which revealed their areas of growth. Based on the results students were placed in mathematics groups for the strategic period. During this period in groups of 10 or less students are working on fluency. All of our entering ELLs were placed with Math teachers who are bilingual in Spanish, the predominant home language in our school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our ENL teacher uses the results of the annual NYSESLAT. The RNMR report is used to disaggregated scores by modality and plan for ongoing instruction. Historically this data has revealed that many of our Expanding students are not moving to Commanding. We are addressing this through out the push-in and pull-out model. We also develop a individualized instructional plan for students who have been long term ELLs. We also use the New York State ELA and Mathematics examination results to support in planning which students need intervention support. Our teachers utilize the report which is issued in August that shows the percentages per question and by CCLS standard. We just this report to make adjustments to our classes and curriculum to address any gaps. Based on the state exams and NYSESLAT scores we are able to assign individualized support using our online programs (ie Reading Plus for reading, ST Math and Tenmarks for math and Moby Max for both Math and ELA) Our ENL teachers looks closely at each student and grade to determine which modality to focus explicitly on in September. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During our meeting in September/October the NYSESLAT and state examination scores are shared for each students in a teachers class during our one-to-one data/goal setting meetings. Teachers then create goals for each student. We also have a student portfolio system where each student has a folder with their picture, attendance data, state assessment, and NYSESLAT scores for the past 3 years. We also include writing samples and math tasks in the folder for our rising 7th and 8th grade students. These folders are shared with teachers. All data is also inputted into our Datacation system and Google Drive for all staff to access. Depending on the data we provide our ENL students with more instructional time then their mandated hours. This occurs before and after school and during lunch. Each week our ILT team meets to discuss data and made adjustments to the assignments of classes and the selection of curriculum materials. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 51  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding ENL program we provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. As per the CR Part 154.2 we service our ELLS in both a stand-alone ENL instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in their core contents. Students receive this in a pull-out model with a certified ENL teacher. Our Emerging, Expanding, Transitioning and Commanding students receive ENL support through this model. This class is by grade with mixed proficiency levels. Our ELL teacher also pushes in to service these level students for their subject area class on a weekly basis as per their mandated hours. We also provide integrated ENL instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. As per the CR Part 154.2 instruction is delivered by a co-teacher certified in ENL and a certified content area teacher. This is done through a push-in model in the English Language Arts class. Both teachers have a common preparation time to collaborate on the lesson plans. In our English Language Arts classes are heterogeneous with a mixture of proficiency levels. We also offer a partially day self-contained model for our entering students who are admitted to our school throughout the school year. Our ENL teacher provides instruction with the support of a Spanish bilingual paraprofessional in small groups. We have three Spanish bilingual teachers (2 in Mathematics and 1 in Social Studies). In these classes Mathematics and Social Studies concepts and terminology are delivered in both Spanish and English. Our entering students attend these classes with these teachers and other ENL students who are Emerging, Expanding, Transitioning and Commanding. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We program students for their mandated hours in STARS classroom. As students are enrolled in our school throughout the school year our school aide and ENL teacher work together ensure that the child is programmed in STARS and receiving all their mandated hours. Our district office disseminates monthly correspondence to ensure that all of our students are programmed accurately according to their proficiency levels. For our Entering students our certified ENL teacher provides services for in a stand along ENL model by pulling students out for 5 times a week for a 45 minute period. She and our Spanish bilingual paraprofessional works with students in small groups. This class has a mix of grades. This meets the 180 mandated minutes. Our ENL teacher also pushes into to our Entering ELA classes 4 times per week for a 45 minute period to meet the integrated ENL minutes. Our Emerging students are receive their Stand Alone ENL services by our certified ENL teachers during a 2 times a week 45 minute class period. Our ENL teacher also pushes into to our Emerging ELA classes 4 times per week for a 45 minute period to meet the integrated ENL minutes. Our transitioning students receive services by the ENL certified teacher pulling students 2 times a week for 45 minute period for stand alone ENL instruction and the teacher pushes in their ELA class 2 times a week for 45 minute periods for integrated services. 2018-19 CEP 52  Our Expanding and Commanding students receive instruction through a 4 times a week push for a 45 minute period to their ELA classes which is integrated ENL services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our stand alone ENL model students receive support in phonemic awareness using the Reading Plus, Just Words and Rewards program in order to ensure that students are developing language acquisition skills need to access complex texts in ELA, Social Studies and Science that are aligned with the CCLS standards. Students also use Moby Max, an online program which assesses students and provides them with drills and lessons at their individualized reading levels. All of these programs are delivered in English. In our stand alone ENL classes our teacher supports students by preparing them for core content prior to them being introduced to topics and concepts in their classes. For example school wide we use a CCLS word acquisition program called Word Generation which introduces academic vocabulary to students around controversial topic each week. Students are provided with copies of the articles and vocabulary in both Spanish and English. For our ENL students our teacher uses strategies such as building schema through images, video clips and class discussions to support students in accessing the Word Generation materials. Each week students produce written pieces regarding issues of the week using academic vocabulary,solve mathematical word problems, respond to science inquiry questions and participate in a debate as a part of this program. Some additional scaffolds that our ENL teacher uses are sentence starters, outlines and word banks to support students in their written responses. In the integrated ENL model students receive support accessing the ELA CCLS aligned Expeditionary Learning curriculum through the use of cognates, visual cues to build prior knowledge, the SYOP method, graphic organizers and the Word Generation program. During these periods our ENL certified teacher supports with small group instruction and provides guidance around how to structure classroom discussions so that students have an opportunity develop verbal language skills. As a part of our CCLS Social Studies and Science curriculum teachers use leveled texts, discussion stems and word banks for ENL students. Students also are supported with the use of Google Docs which allows students to view short video clips with images to support with the content. In the Mathematics classes technology is used to engage and differentiate with programs such as Moby Max, Tenmarks, ST Math and Apple apps. All teachers receive ongoing professional development and all classrooms are equipped with IPADs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We translate our tasks as well as required texts to home languages across classes, i.e. all Math assessments and tasks are translated into students' home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We use technology to differentiate for all sub-groups of ELL students. Teachers also conference with students to set goals based on individual needs. Each students has a Moby max online account which adapts to their individual levels using CCLS mathematics and reading practice. All students also have Google Classroom accounts which allows them to access glossaries, videos and websites. We provide scaffolds in each content area class for all ELL subgroups such as word banks, sentence stems, leveled reading texts, discussion stems and building prior knowledge through videos and images. We track our former ELL progress and provide continued ENL support over the course of the 2 years. Newcomers and developing students receive additional ENL minutes to accelerate their learning. We also support students with morning 2018-19 CEP 53  tutoring and after school tutoring. Teachers also work closely with our ENL teacher to strategically group our long term and former ELLs for student projects and classroom discussions to ensure that they are building academic language skills with students who do not speak their home languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use grade level materials from ST Math, Expeditionary Learning, Word Generation, ACT Now, Science and Social Studies Generation all of which provide ESL extensions. Instructional strategies include sentence stems, discussion prompts and scaffolds to support our ELL-SWD populations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL SWD students receive their services through small class sizes and a bilingual paraprofessional in ELA and Mathematics. We also have parallel Strategic Reading and Strategic Mathematics (Academic Intervention) periods where students receive services as according to their IEP such as SETTS. We also schedule our ICT classes so that our ENL teacher can push in or pull out students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The development of academic language is a focus for all of our ENL students regardless of levels. In ELA and core subjects that require reading of CCLS aligned text we provide Word Generation vocabulary program (offered in both Spanish and English) for our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students. For our Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students we allow them to use Google Classroom to support translating their written response to our weekly Word Generation essay writing prompt. For Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students we also use programs such as Just Words and Reading Plus to support them with phonemic awareness. For our Expanding and Commanding students for reading we support them with the ACT Now curriculum and Rewards which supports with reading comprehension. These program provide students with exposure to text across the subjects (Science, Social Studies, Technology) In Social Studies and Science teachers include translated articles, tasks and word walls in Spanish and English which supports all of our ELL students regardless of levels. In our Mathematics period we use ST Math a program that teaches math concepts through visual images, Ten-Marks online program, and instructional videos from brain-pop and other sites that are translated into our students' home languages. These interventions are used by Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Commanding students. We also provide an Advisory program for our Entering and Emerging students with our Spanish bilingual paraprofessional and ELL teacher to support them with social language skills. them with their social and emotional needs. All students regardless of level also are invited to participate We also have a morning and after school program that is led by our ENL teachers to support students academically which is open to all level of ENL students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There has been an increase in our ENL population specifically Spanish speaking Entering and Emerging students. For this reason we also are looking to hire content teachers who fluently speak Spanish to support us in building relationships with our ENL population specifically students who are Entering newcomers who speak Spanish as their home language. We are also considering hiring an additional ELL teacher and providing additional professional development as well as purchasing additional technology and online programs. We also going to ensure that our teaching staff receive additional professional development in ENL strategies. We are also revising our ELA curriculum to include more culturally relevant materials that represent the cultural background and experiences of our ENL students. For Social Studies we will be adapting the Passport curriculum which provides leveled texts, word banks and strategies to build prior through videos and images. 2018-19 CEP 54  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All applications are translated into home languages. All of our 6th grade students are mandated to an extended day which provide homework help, sports, arts and leadership classes through the YMCA. We also offer programs such as the Gentlemen's Club, Ladies with Purpose, VA Student Ambassadors, and a STEM and dissection club. All students regardless of subgroup participate in these programs. Our ENL teacher also plans field trip opportunities for our Entering and Emerging students to local museums and cultural events. These trips are open to all levels of ELLs however mainly our Entering and Emerging students attend. For our school wide college tours we ensure that there is a staff member who speaks our ENL home language which is Spanish to encourage our Entering and Emerging students to attend. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We utilize several language acquisition programs as well as technology programs created for all ELL students. We use education technological software such as Power Speak, Imagine Learning and ST Math which are designed specifically for ELL populations. In Social Studies and Science we are using the Accessing Complex Text Curriculum which requires students to conduct close readings and annotations supporting with CCLS R.I.-R.L. 6-8.1. We use Reading Plus and Moby Max for reading comprehension and phonics for our Entering and Emerging students. We use Rewards for our Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students. We also use the Social Studies Passport NYC curriculum, the ELA Expeditionary Learning curriculum and Go Math curriculum which includes scaffolds, differentiated texts for all ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Through translations and technology. We use texts and tasks that are translated in home languages as well as Word Walls with cognates and translations for academic terms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use CCLS resources that are grade appropriate in all content areas. We ensure that our classroom libraries provide age appropriate texts with subjects relevant to students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students in both schools can participate in the CHAMPS after school program which allows students from both school to participate. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a grant through MSQI which provides training for teachers to conduct home visits. Our focus this school year will be visiting the homes of our newly enrolled ELL students with our ELL teacher and other subject area teachers. This effort with be coordinated by our parent coordinator, guidance counselor and community associate. We invite our families in for orientation in August where translation is provided. During the summer of prior to each school year we invite our incoming 6 th grade families and students in for an new student orientation. During this orientation we communicate our academic and behavior expectations and administer a base-line assessment to support us in creating classes. All of the materials that are distributed are in our families home languages and that we have translator from the office of translation services or we use a staff member. In September we also have the Back to School Curriculum night where we reinforce our academic and behavior expectations and provide an opportunity for our families to meet with our teachers and staff. For 8 th grade students we have a parent evening to support with the high school application process. At all of these events we ensure that all materials are translated in our students' home languages and a translator is present. 2018-19 CEP 55  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We will be offering Spanish as a language next year to students. For our advanced Spanish speaking ELLs they will be provided with an opportunity to compose essays and read literature in Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As per the CR Part 80 mandates we ensure that our ENL teachers and staff who service ELLS receive professional development. We use our Monday professional development and support from our Word Generation/MSQI instructional coach and the Community District 27 ENL training to address the 50% required hours dedicated to language acquisition with a focus on how to integrate language and content instruction for ELLS. These professional development program are geared towards CCLS standards Reading for Information and Reading for Literature 6-8.4. Our staff who work with ENL students also receive support from a grant we received from MSQI for the Reading Plus program which exposes students to grade level text that is Common Core aligned. In addition to these supports our peer collaboration coach and model teacher support our ELL teacher with implementation of CCLS for ELL students. Our ELL teachers and other staff also are part of our weekly Professional Learning Community which requires reviewing research on instructional strategies using culturally relevant approaches to developing our curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For each professional development a teacher attends our school secretary has a PD calendar for all dates and times of the meetings. We also have a professional development plan that includes the specific needs of our ENL teachers and teachers of ELL students. For all common planning meetings we utilize Google drive to store all of our agendas and accompanying documents. Our Science teachers receive support through on-going training with the Urban Advantage program and Next Generation Science program. Social studies teachers receive support in incorporating reading strategies into their instruction through our weekly common planning period as well as support from our MSQI instructional coach. Our Social Studies teachers also receive PD around the NYC Passport Curriculum which has a component for ELL students. We also utilize our model teachers and peer instructional coach for in-house support. For Mathematics teachers we are using Apple and Go Math PD to support with the use of technology to support our ELL students. Administrators attend ENL training offered by our district as well to stay abreast on instructional strategies to serve our ELL population. The following professional development is offered to our teachers of ELLs that support with the CCLS shift in the use of academic domain 2018-19 CEP 56  language: Word Generation/MSQI coach offers one-on-one support and professional development sessions during Monday professional development, MSQI off-site pd for ELA and Social Studies teachers on reading strategies to access complex texts, off-site pd through Urban Advantage on vocabulary strategies, off -site training for both ENL teachers in Wilson and Rewards phonemic awareness programs, off-site and on-site pd from Apple. In grade teams our teachers are practicing in professional learning community around culturally proficient instruction. All teaching staff and non-pedagogic staff are also receiving PD in restorative practices to support in building relationships with students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We use our once a week parent time on Tuesdays as mandated by the UFT contract to invite our families in to discuss student progress. We have a open door policy for our families. Based on need our teachers arrange individual meetings to discuss student goals and language development progress. During this time all bilingual staff works to translate for families as needed. We distribute the New York State Education Department’s Parent’s Backpack Guide to the Common Core State Standards and the Parents’ Bill of Rights for New York State English Language Learners to our families during this meeting. We also use technology. Goals are translated into home language along with next steps using Google translate. If parents request we reach out to the DOE office of translation and interpretation unit to provide translators. As per question #2 below all records for annual meetings are kept in our Pupil Path online system in which parents have access to. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our bilingual guidance counselor and ESL teacher have built relationships with our families. We ensure that all of our outreach to our families in our Datacation system which gathers information from ATS. Our parent coordinator sends out monthly calendars and letters in Spanish. Our Assistant Principal sends out phone blasts alerting our families of events and important news in both English and Spanish. We also have once a month celebrations for academic achievement where we invite our families in for a celebratory event. In addition we have annual events such as Bring your Father to School Day and our Thanksgiving Luncheon and our annual Family Barbeque. If requested we provide translation services through the DOE office of translation and interpretation unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Doris Lee, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Village Academy School DBN: Q319 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Doris Lee Title Principal Joherra Harris Assistant Principal Kimberly Cooper Parent Coordinator Johanna Mancebo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ashley Cruz Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kiszia Simmons School Counselor Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Tynisa Martin Other Related Service Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q319 School Name: VillageAcademy Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Johanna Mancebo Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. FAC will ensure families fill out the HLIS and understand their right to be communicated to in their preferred language both in written and oral correspondences as new students are enrolled into the school. Survey will be sent home to all students so that family's can update their preference at the onset of each academic school year. Families will be given student emergency cards in their native languages. 2018-19 CEP 60  ATS report will be disseminated to teachers who will be informed of each family's language preference. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Haitian Creole 402 151 3 72.04 27.06 0.54 401 151 3 71.86 27.06 0.54 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families Mastery outlines for each content area At the beginning of each Marking Period. School Calendar monthly procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Primary LAC will translate all documents into Spanish, Haitian Creole, or French. Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French speaking teachers on each grade team will call houses of students on their perspective grade teams. We will use Google Translate for our documents in Spanish as our ENL teacher and several other staff are fluent in Spanish. We will also utilize the program www.onlinetranslator.com Parent Coordinator will send a phone blast via the global connect program, communicating upcoming events in the family's preferred language. Primary LAC 2018-19 CEP 61  Correspondence about upcoming events needs basis Progress Reports/Report Cards 5 progress reports and 5 report cards Individualized Success Plans (ISP) Each Marking Period will translate all documents into Spanish, Haitian Creole, or French. Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French speaking teachers on each grade team will call houses of students on their perspective grade teams. We will use Google Translate for our documents in Spanish as our ENL teacher and several other staff are fluent in Spanish. We will also utilize the program www.onlinetranslator.com Parent Coordinator will send a phone blast via the global connect program, communicating upcoming events in the family's preferred language. Primary LAC will translate all documents into Spanish, Haitian Creole, or French. Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French speaking teachers on each grade team will call houses of students on their perspective grade teams. We will use Google Translate for our documents in Spanish as our ENL teacher and several other staff are fluent in Spanish. We will also utilize the program www.onlinetranslator.com Progress Reports and Report cards will be sent home in the family's preferred home language. The STARS report card system has Spanish versions of the report cards with comments for those families. Where needed for other languages we will use Google Translate and the support of our bilingual staff. Teacher's will use a translating software, such as Google translate, to provide individualized success plans for all students in their preferred language. LAC and Spanish, Haitian Creole and French speaking teachers on each grade team will review all ISPs to ensure accuracy. We will use Google Translate for our documents in Spanish as our ENL teacher and several other staff are fluent in Spanish. We will also utilize the program www.onlinetranslator.com 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 62  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences 9/26, 11/29, 11/30, 3/6, 3/7, 5/9 PTA meetings 1 each month SLT meetings 10 per year Parent Meetings Need Basis interpretation service(s)? LAC and other Spanish, Haitian Creole and French speaking support staff will provide translation services. Other support staff will aid families in the use of over-the-phone interpretation services provided. LAC and other Spanish, Haitian Creole and French speaking support staff will provide translation services during the meetings. LAC Spanish, Haitian Creole and French speaking support staff will provide translation services during the meetings. LAC and Spanish, Haitian Creole and French speaking staff will offer translation to parents who come to the school for meetings with teachers, administration and deans. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the case of an emergency, the LAC, or any available staff member speaking the family's preferred language, will contact family members via phone call. If there is no staff member available, a member of the office staff will contact the translation and interpretation unit for translation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. LAC and parent coordinator will attend any training sessions offered by the translation and interpretation unit. Teaching staff will receive professional development by the LAC on policies and procedures set in place to ensure all families are communicated to in their preferred language. All teachers will receive a list of all students in their class with families preferred languages. This information will also be available in Skedula under students' information. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Correspondence will be sent home with each student of parents rights to receive information in their preferred language. Such documents will be translated in ALL language present on the ATS report Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Students will be sent home with a paper survey to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive. After 1 week, LAC and support staff will contact parent via phone to gather information from families who have not responded. The information will be analyze during the Principal's Cabinet meeting. After analysis, the team will decide on methods that will be put into place to improve language services provided to all families. 2018-19 CEP 64 
