2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q440 School Name: FOREST HILLS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: BEN SHERMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Forest Hills High School 28Q440 342800011440 9, 10, 11, 12 School Number (DBN): 67-01 110 th Street, Forest Hills, NY 11375 718-268-3137 718-793-7850 Phone Number: Fax: Ben Sherman bsherma2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ben Sherman Adam Bergstein William Perkins Ben Sherman ElenaAminova Allison Levin KaitlinMendez Melissa Roy District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent: 30-48 LindenPlace, Flushing, NY 11354 Juan Mendez Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: JMendez2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-281-7696 Fax: 718-281-7519 Field Support Center (FSC) Queen South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5854 Phone Number: 718-648-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ben Sherman Adam Bergstein William Perkins Erica Goldstein n/a Antonio Guirola KaitlinMendez Melissa Roy BoosangKim Regina Lee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Central Queens Y Member/ CSA Member/ CSA 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Lorraine Benjamin AstarNussbaum Naomi Harris LillaBruno Carol Jenkins Jennifer Baum Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Forest Hills High School will provide a nurturing educational setting that promotes cultural understanding. We encourage high expectations and challenge our students academically to ensure they become lifelong learners and caring citizens. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Forest Hills High School is one of the largest and most successful neighborhood high schools in New York City. During an age that political administration that decried the value of such high schools, Forest Hills continued to provide our students with strong educational programs that provided choices for our students. These choices appeal to the varying learning styles of our large student body. The reasons for the school’s success are a reflection of the collaboration that exists between staff, students, parents, and all other strands of the school community. We always take a collaborative approach in our decision making process. As a leadership team supervising various academic departments, as well as guidance, we hold weekly meetings where we bring in feedback from the departments. The Principal holds meetings with the Parents Association and gathers feedback. Finally, we hold meetings with our Student Government to gather information on what is important to the students that we serve. Forest Hills High School’s curriculum is rigorously aligned to the NYS Standards as well as to the CCLS. Various departments have been working closely with in their teacher teams in rolling out rigorous writing and critical thinking components that satisfy the CCLS in each class, while focusing on non-fiction texts. Departments in all disciplines have incorporated argumentative writing into their curriculum, and are an expectation of the class. As part of our school’s instructional focus, we are emphasizing student engagement; therefore, our teacher teams are creating activities that involve all students, and offer a wide array of tasks so that students have the chance to fully understand the lesson. The curriculum promotes higher order thinking skills. Teacher units and lessons utilize pedagogical tools such as Bloom’s taxonomy and Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to promote critical thinking and higher order thinking skills that will prepare the student for college and career readiness. Teacher teams develop unit and lesson plans that challenge students through increased document based writing where citation from the text becomes standard practice in a class. Math curriculum incorporates text and reading based activities that promote higher order thinking. Increased rigor is reflected in all disciplines and is expected from learners of all levels. Student engagement is promoted through lessons that create opportunities for student initiated tasks and inquiry. The increased rigor has led to ELL student gains in the NYSESLAT, where more students than ever have attained the Proficient level. Our SWD population continually outpaces all other like-schools in New York City, and is demonstrated with a graduation rate of over 70% outpaces both the city and state averages of 27% and 44% respectively. We hold our students, staff, and parents to high expectations. For instance, participation in the Regents is a mandatory component of student privileges. In addition, our advanced placement course programming follows our school’s philosophy that all students can learn. In a majority of the school’s AP courses, enrollment is open. Exposure to college level work is just as important as success on the Advanced Placement Exam in fostering college preparedness. We also offer six College Now courses here in Forest Hills, and have partnered with Queens College to offer additional courses on their campus. In all, this leads to approximately 1000 college credits earned by our students while still at Forest Hills High School. Finally, our athletes are required to maintain an 80 average in order to participate on a varsity sports team. To date, our work in establishing and communicating a culture of high expectations has led to results that are ahead of the majority of our peer group’s results (69% versus 48.5% for students enrolled in college six months after graduation). In addition, data from the most recent Progress Report shows that 64.4% of our students are college prepared, compared to 61.5% of our peer schools. This also represents an improvement of over 7% and 11% compared with the past two academic years respectively. Our staff is embracing more efficient and effective means of communication with parents and students. Our official school website highlights the achievements of our students, and promotes school-wide activities that foster an awareness of college and next steps. Skedula / PupilPath is used to send out emails to reach a changing parental demographic. 2018-19 CEP 10  Additionally, with the approval of a School Based Option for the past 3 academic years, we have been able to foster an environment of collaboration in line with the Framework for Great Schools by creating common planning time for our teachers. This has allowed them the time needed to further develop curriculum, analyze key data trends, and reach out to all strands of the Forest Hills HS community. Forest Hills High School is a large comprehensive academic high school. We have over 3800 students spanning 11 periods of classes. Despite this, we have achieved five consecutive A’s on the NYC DOE’s progress report and have a graduation rate consistently in the high eighty percent range. To accomplish this, we offer a wide variety of academic programs such as: Sagan STEM Program Law Academy    Drama Academy  Business Academy  Public Service Academy  Music Academy  Health Professions Academy  Our Foreign Language Department offers eight unique languages including American Sign Language  Over 20 different Advanced Placement courses Our students are involved in partnerships and competitions throughout the city and state; a list that is far too long to list here. It does encompass all academic areas and disciplines and is readily available to the extremely diverse student population. We are a school that is well balanced. While we may have an excellent academic track record, we also support a growing number of ENL students and students with IEP’s. No matter which student enters our door, we are dedicated in providing an excellent educational experience. We are equally proud of our successes with our high achieving students and our most at risk students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ELLs and SWD obtaining AYP; increase credit accumulation of lowest third 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Quality Review Rating, 2016-2017 received Well Developed in 5 areas: 1.4 Positive Learning Environment; 3.4 High Expectations; 1.3 Leveraging Resources; 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development; and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems. According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot report, our school improved in the areas of Strong Family-Community ties going from a 73% positive response to 77%. This year's focus continues to be in the area of Strong Family-Community ties as we received an overall rating of Fair. We will also continue to focus on the area of Supportive Environment, Rigorous Instruction, and Collaborative Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q440 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 3783 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 316 332 11 94 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 95 44 29 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 63.8% % Reduced Lunch 7.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 34.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.53 1% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 94% 86% 82.4% 34.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES NO YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 411 284 10 16 90.2% 9.3% 14.6% 8.1% 23.8% 3.7% 24 11% 7.2 N/A N/A 94% 89% 93.0% 55% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A YES YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2016-2017 School Survey, 86% of students earned enough credits in 9th grade to be on track for graduation. This year's goal is to increase to 88%, the number of 9th grade students earning enough credits (10 credits or more) to be on track for 4 year graduation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal is that 88% of our cohort "X" students will be on track for a 4-year graduation by June 2019 as measured by credit accumulation. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of 9th Grade (Cohort X) Team. Team members include administrators/supervisors, Guidance Counselors and Deans. 8/18 Principal Grade 9 Cohort X Team Identify students in the lowest third Grade 9 9-10/18 Members of the 9th Grade Cohort Team Send data to teachers of identified students Professional development on literacy for teachers as well as focused small group tutoring. Monitor process by reviewing every report card. Identify students failing or at risk of failing. Meet with students and parents/guardians. Program students for AM/PM, Saturday school and tutoring. Intensive follow-up by Guidance Counselors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Cohort X Team Grade 9 Cohort X Team Grade 9 Cohort X Team 9/2018-6.19 Members of the 9th Grade Cohort Team 10/18 - 6/19 Members of the 9th Grade Cohort Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, all teachers will communicate expectations for rigorous instruction through the Pupil Path platform. Through Pupil Path, teachers will communicate with students and parents, their course syllabi, grading policy, and academic and behavioral progress. Every student and parent has a Pupil Path account. Happening in the Hills, the school's weekly newsletter is emailed to parents/guardians. At the monthly SLT and PA meetings, agenda items include supporting their children at home. The school hired a Parent Coordinator who is accessible to parents/guardians by email, phone and in-person. The Parent Coordinator emails a weekly newsletter exclusively to parents with important information that is translated into multiple languages. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 14  9th Grade Cohort Team, PM and Saturday School, Tutoring and a Parent Coordinator. Title 1 funding will pay for per session tutoring to support struggling students, pay for teacher professional development throughout the year, and will be used to purchase instructional materials to support classroom learning. Grant money from our CBO will pay for PM school and Saturday school staff to support our struggling students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the Fall Term (January 2019), we will review credit accumulation data for cohort X students, as indicated by Marking Period 3 report card grades and identify students who require academic intervention services so that 88% of our 9th grade students can be on track for 4-year graduation by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Scholarship data from Marking Period 3 report card grades (January 2019) will be used to assess our progress towards our annual goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the School Survey, 84% of students said that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room and cafeteria. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students feeling safe in school will increase by 2%, as measured by the learning environment survey. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Internal school safety campaigns. Students are required to swipe their ID cards upon entry and exit of the school building. All students. 9/2018- Principal, APO, COSA School assemblies by cohort. Increased use of PupilPath by counselors and deans. Engaging Schools initiative. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6/2019 Parents 10/2018- Students 11/2018 Students and staff. Students 10/2018-12/2018 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, APO, AP/PPS, Cohort teams AP's APO, AP/PPS How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, Happening in the Hills, the school's weekly newsletter is emailed to parents/guardians. At the monthly SLT and PA meetings, agenda items include supporting their children at home. School hired a Parent Coordinator who is accessible to parents/guardians by email, phone and in-person. The Parent Coordinator emails a weekly newsletter exclusively to parents with important information. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Current staff including, but not limited to teachers and administration. School Leadership Team, Parents’ Association. Per session will be made available as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP Title I TA 21st Century Grant X SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the Fall Term (January 2019), we will conduct a mock student survey to measure the number of students who feel safe in our school. This data will inform our decisions on focus for improvements. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As of 2/12/18, the average rating for each of the domain 3 categories in Danielson were as follows: 3a - 3.01; 3c - 3.16; 3d -3.08. The lowest average rating is in domain 3a- Questioning and Discussion. Our average ratings indicate that teachers need continued growth in Domain #3. In addition, we are aligning with the superintendent's 2018-2019 goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase professional development opportunities for teachers with special focus on Domain # 3. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal provides professional development for Assistant Principals on higher level questioning and discussion using Bloom's Taxonomy as a resource and models it at all administrative and supervisory meetings. New teachers will meet once a week for a New Teacher Circle PD Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assistant Principals 8/18-6/19 Principal New Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Supervision, Science and Assistant Principal, Supervision, Social Studies Assistant Principals turnkey to teachers in their monthly department meetings. Teachers 9/17-5/18 Assistant Principals, Chancellor's Conference Day Professional Development Teachers Assistant Principals will monitor on an excel spreadsheet the number of teachers attending professional development throughout the year. Assistant Principals, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 11/18, 1/19, 6/19 Supervision Assistant Principals, Supervision 10/18-6/19 Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, our parent coordinator will continue to email a weekly newsletter to parents/guardians with important information that will educate families on how they can collaborate with teachers. At the monthly SLT and 2018-19 CEP 20  PA meetings, agenda items will include topics that support collaboration between families and teachers. The school will continue to utilize a Parent Coordinator who is accessible to parents/guardians by email, phone and in-person. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funding will pay for per session PD opportunities. Assistant Principals will also provide PD to staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the fall term (Januray 2019), we will review the building-wide breakdown of teacher ratings in Danielson domain 3 components. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, Sign-Sheets and Feedback from Monthly Department meetings, Optional PD, Chancellor’s Conference Days Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Low performing students have limited access to the higher level classes like Advanced Placement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase College Readiness by promoting greater student access to higher level coursework and Advanced Placement courses. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will be given the opportunity to partake in college level courses through programs like College Now and SUNY Farmingdale State accreditation. Lowest third students 8/18-6/19 Principal, AP PPS, guidance counselors AP Jump Start Create ICT AP classes and Honors ICT classes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement AP U.S. / AP World students 8/27-8/30/18 Students with an IEP 9/2018-6/2019 AP SS APs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the monthly SLT and PA meetings, agenda items will include how the school is professionally developing teachers. The school will utilize the Parent Coordinator to act as a direct liason between parents and Assistant Principals. The Parent coordinator will also email weekly newsletters to parents which will help support family understanding of Effective School Leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, Quick Flip Questioning for Critical Thinking Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  Using the Marking Period 3 Report Card data, the school will track the progress of students sitting in ICT AP classes and ICT Honors classes. This will inform our decisions moving forward. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Lowest third students can be tracked in STARS to discern participation in higher level classes such as honors, AP, and College Now. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 71% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's academic performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, communication with parents and community will improve by 2%, as measured by the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continued use of PupilPath/Skedula by staff Teachers 9/2018 Principal Improved translation services Parents 9/2018- Principal AP's Community 6/2019 Members Parents parents, community members 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, APO 10/2018- Principal 6/2019 Continued partnerships with CBO's The creation of a School Community Council 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Central Queens Y Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be provided with additional professional development on the use of Skedula/Pupil Path. The Parent Coordinator will continue to send out weekly parent newsletters to keep parents updated on events in the school. Per session will be used to bring in support staff for translation services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the Fall semester (January 2019), we will review the frequency of parents logging into Pupil Path and the number of parents using Pupil Path. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of student grades, teacher / administrative recommendations, parental recommendations Mathematics Review of student grades, teacher / administrative recommendations, parental recommendations When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Subject tutoring during teacher's C-6R. Regents tutoring on weekends prior to weekends. Twice a week and on Saturdays Subject tutoring during teacher's C-6R. Regents tutoring on weekends prior to Regents. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) CASE Academy – College Academy of Skills and Enhancement Tutoring Special Classes. Students will be the focus of targeted instruction, differentiated instruction, and/ or AIS. PM and Saturday Schools CASE Academy – College Academy of Skills and Enhancement Tutoring Special Classes. Students will be the focus of targeted instruction, differentiated Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction. One-to-one Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction SmallGroup instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction One-to-one Small Group instruction, blended learning model and 2018-19 CEP 28  Science Review of student grades, teacher / administrative recommendations, parental recommendations Social Studies Review of student grades, teacher / administrative recommendations, parental recommendations instruction, and/ or AIS. one to one instruction PM and Saturday Schools CASE Academy – College Academy of Skills and Enhancement Tutoring Special Classes. Students will be the focus of targeted instruction, differentiated instruction, and/ or AIS. Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction One-to-one Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction PM and Saturday Schools CASE Academy - College Academy of Skills and Enhancement Tutoring Special Classes. Students will be the focus of targeted instruction, differentiated Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction One-to-one Small Group instruction, blended Subject tutoring during teacher's C-6R. Regents tutoring on weekends prior to Regents. Subjecttutoring during teacher's C-6R. Regents tutoring on weekends prior to the Regents. 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Ongoing review of student records / behaviors / actions by SBST, school psychologist, guidance counselors, SAPIS workers learning model and one to one instruction Small Group instruction, blended learning model and one to one instruction Push –in visits to all classes; meeting all students in a caseload in a group setting Individual and group counseling Parent Outreach; via phone, e-mail, in- school individual appointments and parent outreach meetings. instruction and/or AIS. The School Psychologist works in conjunction with the SBS Team to provide services to all students that require them. The social workers at Forest Hills High School serve as the at-risk counselor for mandated as well as non-mandated students who exhibit social and emotional developmental problems Students meet with them on regular bases; they work in conjunction with outside therapists and agencies. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 135 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Students in Temporary Housing receive increased intervention services from our guidance department. Additionally, any school supplies that are needed are required. If students need access to technology, it is provided for them. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  s 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will begin recruitment of highly qualified teachers in February 2019. We will provide teachers with a supportive environment that will lead to high retention rate by setting up a teacher workroom that has a "magic closet" which will allow for easy access to teacher materials and technology that helps with lesson planning. We will also include teachers in the school decision making process by including them on committees for budget, PD, etc. We will offer multiple PD sessions that are led by our most effective teachers to turnkey quality professional development throughout the year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Throughout the year, teachers, assistant principals, the principal and all other staff will attend PD sessions related to CCSS and turn key their training to the entire staff in the building. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are invited to join PD committees and Assessment committees to examine the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1749063 38862 19092 21048754 x x x x 2018-19 CEP 34  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 35  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Forest Hills High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Forest Hills High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement will include working with families to educate them about their child's educational goals, and how to support their child's learning progress so that they can be more successful in school. They will also be included in the school's decision making process. They will work to communicate with parents, and organize events. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 39  Forest Hills High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 70 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III Plan is a supplemental program that will focus on strategies to achieve the goals stated in the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan: increase credit accumulation of ELL students through improved differentiated instruction and alternative means of assessment and support services. Another plan’s goal is to provide supplemental instruction to assist ELL students in passing core subjects and Regents examinations and meeting the Common Core Standards. The Title III Supplemental Program will occur Before and After School (AM School and PM School) and as part of the Saturday Academy. The AM and PM School and Saturday Academy classes are supplemental services that complement the mandated services under CR Part 154. AM and PM School classes are scheduled before or after the the students’ school day. Based on the needs of the students, students are programmed twice a week (Monday/Tuesday or Wednesday/Thursday) for 2 periods in AM School or PM School, or four times a week (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday) for 1 period in AM or PM school. AM and PM School begins in October and ends in June following the NYCDOE School Calendar. On Saturdays, students attend two 2 1/2 hour sessions (8:00AM – 10:30AM and 10:30AM – 1:00PM). Forest Hills High School’s Saturday Academy is held from October to June. AM and PM School classes use the official ATS generated attendance sheets. Saturday school classes use Skedula, school information management system, based on STARS rosters. The Title III program will support language development by focusing on activities so students can develop into sophisticated readers and writers. The analysis of NYSESLAT results indicates that ELL students score lower on the Reading/Writing sections than on the Speaking/Listening sections. ELLs also fail at a higher rate than non-ELLs in the ELA, Science and Social Studies Regents. Based on this analysis, Title III supplemental classes will support higher achievement in English and other core content area subjects by focusing on English language development with an emphasis on Tier II words, academic language and functional language using alternative text sets. Long-term ELL and SIFE ELL students and students who need additional support based on their report card grades and NYSESLAT scores will be targeted. Students are grouped by interest because they register for the Title III LEP Supplemental Program classes they want to attend. There are 3 – 4 classes depending on student registration with a limit of 34 students per one certified ENL teacher. Students will read a balance of informational and literary texts; build knowledge about the world through text; read central and grade appropriate texts; engage in rich and rigorous text-based answers, write from sources and build academic vocabulary. All classes will be taught by certified ENL teachers. ENL instruction will utilize a blended learning approach which combines face to face classroom methods with computer mediated activities to form an integrated instructional approach. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Books and resource materials used in the Title III classes will include alternative text sets to develop academic language, Tier II vocabulary development and language function, novels, short stories, primary source and historical documents and other informational texts and other resources including Achieve 3000 and the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit by Kate Kinsella. Software applications will be used as part of the blended learning approach. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: One of FHHS’ professional development goals is to improve scholarship rates for ELL students in all of their subject area classes and Regents Examinations. PD sessions are held after the teacher's day. Sessions are held throughout the school year starting in the middle of the Fall term. PD is for six 2 hour sessions and a 3 ½ hour culminating session. This gives the ENL teachers time to implement and reflect on the PD they received and initiated the last school year so they can develop this year's high quality PD sessions. PD is provided by the Assistant Principals and the ENL teachers for ENL teachers and other content area teachers. Our ENL program follows the Part 154 regulations. The program differentiates five levels: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. All students receive one period a day of integrated English classes, where an English and an ENL teacher co-teach. In addition, entering students receive a two-period bloc of self-standing ENL, and emerging students receive a one-period class or self-standing ENL. Commanding students (i.e. former ELLs) are in regular classes co-taught at least for 90 minutes a week by an English and an ENL teacher. The program also differentiates between classes for underclassmen and classes for upperclassmen, so that, following regulations, students are not together if they are more than one grade apart. This model/structure for instruction requires professional development for the assigned ENL teachers so instruction is not in a vacuum. Professional development will be provided for and received by the ENL teachers on how to align ENL curriculum and unit plans to the English curriculum and the shifts in the Common Core Standards, As a result of the professional development, teachers will share, collaborate, investigate, learn and implement new and enhanced instructional programs for newcomers, SIFE and Long-term ELLs and will improve the teaching and learning in core subject areas. This will also include sharing best practices to reflect on the skills and competencies ELL students need to succeed academically. The main provider for ENL professional development at this time is the Queens South Field Support Center, which regularly informs our school of learning opportunities. ENL teachers are offered this PD regularly and normally attend one or two sessions a year, depending on offerings and school needs. For example, a goal this year is for the ENL teachers to provide ENL strategies to teachers in the content area classes, for which workshops in this area will be prioritized. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents/Guardians of ELLs need additional services so they can support their high school child. Forest Hills High School provides evening workshops for parents/guardians of ELLs. Parents/Guardians of ELLs need to be provided assistance and services in their home language. Recognizing this need, Forest Hills High School provides translation at these evening workshops. Translation is provided in the three largest home language groups: Spanish, Chinese and Russian. Workshops will assist parents/guardians in motivating and assisting their children to meet high school requirements and to ensure college readiness. Guidance Counselors will hold workshops/meetings/small group meetings for each language group, Spanish, Chinese and Russian. The topics of the workshop/meetings/small group meetings will include How to Understand Graduation Requirements and High School Records; How to Access Student and School Information; and How to Communicate with Your Child and the School to Improve Academic Achievement. Senior/College Counselors will hold meetings/workshops for parents/guardians of ELLs. The topics will include How to Begin the College Application Process. The entire guidance department has implemented the use of the “Career and College Readiness” program, Naviance, in order to engage parents and students in the college and career process. This program, through the “Family Connection” tool, simplifies the college application and choice process for ELLs and all students. Workshops for parents/guardians of ELLS will be held to introduce them to Naviance. Parents/Guardians of ELLs will be notified in various mediums. Flyers in home languages will be distributed in classes and mailed home. The phone master will be used in the home languages. Information will be posted on the school’s website. Guidance Counselors will conduct outreach to parents/guardians in their caseload. Workshops are scheduled monthly for one to two hours from October to June. Agendas, attendance sheets and invitations are part of the Title III LEP Plan document folder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Teachers x 408 hrs = $24,480 Supervisors x 75 hr = $4,650 Guidance Counselors x 30 hr = $1,950 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for teacher hours ENL teachers to teach AM, PM and Saturday classes and for professional development activities. Per session for Guidance Counselors to 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. conduct parent/guardian evening workshops/meetings. Per Session for Supervisors hours to support /conduct Title III activities including professional development activities and parent/guardian workshops/meetings. Alternative Texts, Leveled Texts, Resources and Materials including primary source, informational texts, and historical documents; materials to support student created projects Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $7,772 $38,862 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Forest Hills High School Borough Queens School Number 440 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ben Sherman Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anna Cho, LAB-BESIS Coordinato Teacher/Subject Area Martina Grant (Social Studies) Teacher/Subject Area N. Anastasiadis (Social St.) Related-Service Provider Barbara Cali Superintendent Juan Méndez Assistant Principal Raúl Macías Coach N/A School Counselor María Caamaño Parent William Perkins Parent Coordinator Suzanna Khaimova Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) Nicole Lee, ENL Coordinator C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3917 Total number of ELLs 335 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.55% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Spanish 2018-19 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 57 0 0 0 0 57 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 57 0 0 57 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is mostly measured by the NYSESLAT scores and by the ELLs’ performance in all disciplines. The New York State Accountability Report of 2014, released in March of 2015, shows that for ELLs the school made AYP in the 2018-19 CEP 50  following categories: -Participation and performance criteria in ELA: 98% of ELL students were tested in ELA. - Participation and performance criteria in Math: 98% of ELL students were tested in Math (64 students out of 65). - Performance in Math: The EAMO Objective was 107, and the school reached a Performance Index of 120. There were 64 accountability cohort members. The school did not meet AYP in the following category: - Performance in ELA: The EAMO Objective was 107, and the school reached a Performance Index of 83. There were 64 accountability cohort members. - Four year graduation rate: The school did not meet AYP for limited English proficient students for this category. The total cohort number of ELLs was 107 students. The progress target was 67%. FHHS ELLs graduation rate was 64%. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the last years there has been a significant decrease in the number of ELLs who scored beginner or intermediate in the NYSESLAT exam, and a dramatic increase of ELLs who scored Advanced and Proficient. The same pattern can be observed with the new categories: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. The number of students scoring expanding and commanding has increased significantly. In other words, the school has been successful in moving the students up in the score scale. Usually, about 70 students scored Proficient in the NYSESLAT every year, with very few SWDs passing this exam. In 2015, even with the new NYSESLAT –a modified exam with whose format and content we were not familiar- the number of students scoring Commanding raised to 112. This significant improvement in results is attributed to our consistency in maintaining the changes that we introduced several year ago in our ENL program: - The teaching methodology was changed to adapt it to Common Core Standards. Instead of teaching English language in isolation, we opted for teaching ENL through content areas, mainly Social Studies, English and Science. Interdisciplinary teaching through content area texts is now usual in ENL. - Common planning time for teachers was included as part of the ENL program. All ENL teachers now have especial time allocated in their schedules for common planning time. - Not only ENL teachers meet among themselves, but they also hold regular meetings with teachers of other departments (namely English, Social Studies and Science) who teach content area classes for ELLs. The content area teachers provide the ENL teachers with authentic materials for their ENL classes (so that they can teach language through real texts), and the ENL teachers provide the content area teachers with strategies. - To make common planning easier, the school designated a separate workroom exclusively for ENL teachers, where they meet daily. - Placement of students is done strictly by NYSESLAT or NYSITELL results, as per regulations. - Our program differentiates between classes for students who need literacy (reading and writing) or fluency (listening and speaking sklls). In the Intermediate and Advanced levels, Literacy and Fluency classes were created to offer the students the skills that they most need according to their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores. We are just beginning to see the benefits of this distinction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 51  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Forest Hills High School has an ENL department that offers a freestanding ENL program serving the needs of the General Education and Special Education ELL population. In ENL, classes are ungraded and homogeneous by NYSESLAT levels. For Transitional and Expanding levels, our program differentiates between classes for Literacy (reading and writing) and Fluency (listening, speaking). In Social Studies, ELL students are in content classes together in Global Studies I, Global Studies II, American History and Participation in Government/ Economics. These classes are graded and heterogeneous (not based on NYSELAT proficiency levels). In Science, ELL students are together in Living Environment (two-year program) and Earth Science classes. These classes are graded and heterogeneous (not based on NYSESLAT proficiency levels). ELL students take Math classes with the general population. In English, there are the ELA classes for ELL students required under CR Part 154 (ELL studens also programmed for Advanced ENL). Former ELLs are in an English Skills classes until they demonstrate mastery to move onto a “mainstream/regular” English class. The curriculum is similar to that of a mainstream class. The English teacher continues the task of skills building and a more concentrated analysis of literature. ELL students attend classes with the general population in all other departments including, Art, Music, Business, Health Education and Physical Education. Forest Hills High School’s ENL classes are homogeneous since ELLs are programmed based on their NYSESLAT proficiency scores. All other classes are graded and heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs receive the New York CR Part 154 mandated number of instructional minutes according to their NYSESLAT proficiency levels in a free standing ENL program. Each period is 42 minutes. The Entering ELL students are programmed for 3 units of study per week, Emerging ELL students are programmed for 2 units a week. Transitioning and Expanding ELL students are programmed for 1 unit per week. The ENL Coordinator periodically reviews the ELL students’ programs to ensure that they receive the mandated number of instructional minutes based on their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL All five Forest Hills High School ENL teachers are certified. As per regulations, students are placed in ENL and/or English classes according to their last NYSESLAT scores. Teachers do not use any specific book but create their own materials based on the level of the students and the curriculum for each class. They follow a curriculum that integrates mostly Social Studies and English component, and meet regularly to share materials and strategies. Science and Math are gradually being incorporated into the ENL instruction too. Teachers meet with content area teachers on a regular basis to discuss how to incorporate 2018-19 CEP 52  content area materials into the ENL class, and how to provide these teachers with teaching strategies for ELLs. ENL instruction is focused in not teaching language in isolation but in context with authentic materials, as recommended by the Common Core Learning Standards, for which ENL teachers use real materials taken from the regular content area classes, from real-life, and from previous exams (Regents, NYSESLAT, etc.). Native language support is provided with Native Language classes in Spanish, Chinese, Hebrew, French and Italian, and with bilingual materials (dictionnaries, glossaries, books, etc.). ENGLISH: In the expanding level, ELLs receive instruction from both a certified English teachers and certified ENL teacher. As students enter this level of instruction they are introduced and exposed to deeper literary analysis and rigor in preparation for the New York State English Regents and the future CCS English exam. Teachers of these classes create a curriculum that is rich with Tier II and III words, higher level reading documents and non-fiction materials. Additionally, teachers use data from Skedula and S.E.S.I.S. to cultivate curriculum to differentiate student learning styles while at the same time maintaining focus on the four major language markers: reading, writing, listening and speaking needed to achieve success. Several methods and techniques such as differentiated instruction, testing accommodations, articulation between the English and ENL Departments, technology, scaffolding and graphic organizers are used to meet the kinesthetic and/or visual learning styles. For the past three years, teachers have also met to create and incorporate Common Core Standards. On the 2015 English Regents, 51.2% ELL students taking the exam received a grade of 65%. This percentage is a gain of 2.6 % from the 2014 school year. Additionally, 11.4% of ELL students taking the English Regents scored 75%. (It must be noted that 12 student papers from January 2015 and 16 student papers from June 2015 are still under review and FHHS is waiting for the final assessment.). The added rigor allows students to hone the necessary skills for college growth or needs of improvement. MATHEMATICS ELL students take Math classes with the general population. Academic vocabulary is stressed. In addition to math-specific terms being taught, students need to understand the difference between the generic meaning of words and their mathematical definitions. Small group instruction is often used: Students are often grouped together so that they may offer bilingual support to each other. Teachers are taught how to use manipulatives and technology purposefully to offer visual aid to students. In addition, students are given glossaries in their respective languages. Teachers are encouraged to have students use dictionaries when glossaries are not available or in addition to them. SCIENCE: The Science content is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards, and all Science teachers provide ELL students with a balanced approach to literacy, including high quality instructional practices that facilitate academic excellence for ELLs. All Science teachers differentiate their instruction to meet the diverse learning needs of ELL students. Teachers use materials that support ELLs in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. Technology is utilized in the classroom to show images, graphic organizers and animations to assist ELLs. ELL students are encouraged to use glossaries, dictionaries, and materials in native languages. Teachers also group students of the same language for classroom activities regularly, so that they can assist one another. ENL methodology and instructional strategies are used by all teachers. There is also articulation and support with ENL teachers. Teachers use scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition. Science teachers also provide ELL students with additional support such as tutoring, individualized attention during class time and independent conferencing outside of the classroom. SOCIAL STUDIES In Social Studies, ELL students are programmed for specially designated classes in each of the five required courses, Global History I and II, American History and Participation in Government and Economics. The students in these specially designated classes are all ELL students. They are placed based on graduation requirements, and therefore these classes are heterogenous if we consider their NYSESLAT scores. All courses are aligned to the goals of the Common Core, with expectations of rigorous readings, primary source documents, promoting higher order critical thinking and promoting writing that is supported with evidence and clearly builds an argument. All students, including ELLs, are expected to pass culminating exams in Social Studies, Global History and Geography and US History and Government Regents, in order to earn a diploma. 2018-19 CEP 53  FOREIGN LANGUAGE The Foreign Language department of Forest Hills High School offers 7 languages: Spanish, French, Italian, Hebrew, Chinese, Latin and American Sign Language. As much as possible, English translation is avoided in the Foreign Language classes, and the frequent use of visuals and interactive situations allow ELLs to follow the classes without significant difficulties. Language teachers have ample experience in teaching techniques for students who don’t master the language taught in class. The foreign language class frequently helps ELLs complete gaps or enrich their vocabulary in English. The Foreign Language Department regularly works in close collaboration with the ENL and English Departments to assist these students in bridging the gap between their native language and English. The alignment of the curriculum with the Common Core Learning Standards has increased the connection between the foreign language classes and other disciplines, which helps our students. SPECIAL EDUCATION Content is delivered with the needs and challenges of English Language Learners in mind. General education instructors work alongside with ENL teachers, special education teachers, language para-professionals, and related service providers to give this student population with targeted support. Differentiated instruction is at the foundation of our school’s academic philosophy. Material is presented in a variety of ways, and students are given options to demonstrate what they have learned. Graphic organizers and manipulatives are used whenever possible to appeal to kinesthetic and/or visual learners, and to circumvent language barriers. Oral presentations and presentations that require technological aids are used to the benefit of students that have significant difficulty with written communication in English. Emphasis is made on vocabulary-building, exposure to various types of texts, and instruction that focuses on content-appropriate writing, in order to enhance the reading and writing abilities of our students. ART AND MUSIC In the arts, all performance based classes are mainstream. ELLs are placed into their respective classes by performance ability not by written assessments. Content is delivered using several strategies for ELL learners including modeling, bridging, tiered vocabulary, partnering and visual images. In Art Appreciation, a more writing intensive class, we offer an ELL Art Class taught by a dual-licensed ENL and Art teacher. HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION In Health and Physical Education, content is delivered using several strategies for ELLs including modeling, bridging, tiered vocabulary, partnering and visual images. PE teachers often group students of the same language for certain activities so the students can assist one another. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? An ATS RHLA report of September 2015 revealed that 67 different languages are spoken by FHHS students at their respective homes. This is a reflection of the fact that Queens is the most diverse county in the United States (cf. "The NYC Experience: Queens". The City of New York, 2013). English is the language of approximately 40% of the student population. The major language groups other than English are Spanish, Russian, Chinese (in its different variations) and Begali. Spanish-speaking students who take the NYSITELL are also tested for the Spanish LAB. For Spanish and Chinese, the school offers separate classes for native or heritage speakers (five different levels for Hispanics, from beginners who can only speak/understand to Advanced Placement classes in language and literature, and two levels in Chinese, Regents-prep and Advanced Placement). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 54  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All students in the ELL classes, as well as former ELLs and ELLs with IEPs, are identified on Skedula and SESIS, to which all teachers have access. Additionally, STARS is available for administrators, guidance counselors and Program Office, who also provide data to teachers. The ENL Coordinator and the Assistant Principals of ENL, Data and ISS are important sources of information too, who assist teachers to identify and work with these students. ELLs and former ELLs receive the accommodations mandated by the English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide 2015-16, the NYCDOE Test Administration Handbook for High Schools 2015-16, the High School Academic Policy Reference Guide (updated April 2015) and Part 154 Regulation. ELL and former-ELL testing accommodations may include: - Content area Regents exams are offered in languages other than English whenever available. - Time extension - Separate location - Third reading of the listening section for the Comprehensive English Regents exam - Use of bilingual dictionnaries and glossaries - Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions (with all responses recorded in only one of the two editions) - Oral translation for lower-incidence languages - Writing responses in the native language (except ELA Regents exam). These testing accommodations do not apply for the NYSESLAT exam. ENGLISH Instruction is differentiated for ELL subgroups in the following ways: SIFEs need additional support and instruction in basic skills for a number of reasons: stress, literacy and academic gaps, frustration and a higher risk of dropping out of school. One way to meet SIFE needs is to build a classroom environment rich with rules, structure, and routine. Establishing these elements is a strong foundation for these students in order to begin building their academic success. Teachers, using data from Skedula and/or the ENL Coordinator, create documents and activities that not only begin the process of academic education, but also allow them to succeed in a least restrictive environment (LRE). Most students who have received ENL services 4 to 6 years are in the Expanding ENL level and are programmed for one ENL/English class to continue to assist with language acquisition. Students who are Commanding and have shown greater growth and mastery are programmed for English “Skills” level classes. In these classes, students transition to a mainstream setting where instruction is differentiated to meet student needs and to continue to advance language growth. Students are exposed to higher level critical thinking assignments, deeper literary analysis in preparation for the English Regents and the Senior Thesis project. This applied rigor at the correct level of difficulty allows students to succeed while at the same time, advance in their language skills. Teachers implement curriculum using Common Core Standards to help increase College Readiness. Students are exposed to Library research lessons, introduction to literary and non-fiction data bases and use of technology to assist in their research. Most long term ELLs who have completed 6+ years are also programmed for one ENL class as well as one English class. This English class may be advanced literacy or a “Skills” level depending on the data that is available from Skedula and the ENL Coordinator. Instruction at this level is also differentiated to address the various language levels and learning styles. The instructional plan created for former ELLs includes programming for “Skills” level classes until they demonstrate mastery for a mainstream/regular English class. The curriculum is similar to that of a mainstream class. The teachers continues to add rigor and incorporate CCS in order to continue the task of building literacy and language skills with the infusion of more advanced literature. MATHEMATICS Students are grouped in Mathematics based on prior standardized math exams taken. If there isn’t a record of prior standardized exams, students are given a placement test in the Math office. There are ELL students who enter the school and are advanced in mathematics although they do not read and speak English well. ELL students are placed in math classes 2018-19 CEP 55  based upon their math ability. As the common core standards are requiring more literacy skills, Math teachers are now reinforcing the reading and writing skills of ELLs. SOCIAL STUDIES Teachers are expected to know the ELL or SWD status of their students via Skedula and SESIS, and differentiate to meet the needs of each learner. This is monitored through discussions in meetings and in observations. The calendar of lessons for each of the 5 required courses has been worked on over the past few years and for many lessons, there are suggested activities, strategies and resources specifically targeted to ELLs and students with IEPs formally entered on this document. As teachers continue their work on this, their new suggestions and resources are added to the calendar of lessons. Newcomers are identified and teachers bring in more Tier 1 vocabulary into their lessons for these students. SIFE students also get more Tier 1 and Tier 2 vocabulary work, as well as individual instruction about acclimating to the culture of a school. Teachers also provide, where appropriate and available, documents and exams that have been translated into the home language of the student. ELLs with 4-6 years of services receive documents with higher level text and assignments. They are also given the opportunity to take to take electives in Social Studies. Long term Ells (more than 6 years receiving services) are identified by the ENL Coordinator, and teachers work to meet their individual needs. Former ELLs move into regular Social Studies classes, or honors or AP when appropriate. Teachers utilize guidance support services to help ensure attendance and improved academic success. Teachers of all ELLs use leveled texts and differentiated strategies to meet the needs of individual learners. They also use different grouping strategies and activity prompts to assist. Tutoring is also made available to ELLs, both from teachers and peers. The goal of all of this is to lay out high standards for the ELLs students, then with strong literacy development and support, help them meet those expectations. SCIENCE Different groups of students (SIFEs, newcomers, developing, long-term and former-ELLs) are identified through STARS and Skedula, and with the information provided by the ENL Coordinator. Teachers provide individual attention to SIFEs, especially in collaboration with the guidance counselors . This subgroup is particularly weak and need academic and emotional support. Newcomers are grouped with other students who speak the same language so that they can assist one another during learning activities within the classroom. The newcomers are encouraged to use glossaries, dictionaries, and other materials in their native language. Teachers also use tiered vocabulary with these students during instruction. Teacher unit plans and lesson plans include differentiated instructional strategies. Scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition are utilized to assist these ELLS. ELLs that have been receiving service for 4-6 years or 6+ years are identified through STARS and Skedula, and grouped with other students who speak the same language so that they can assist one another during learning activities within the classroom. They are encouraged to use glossaries, dictionaries, and other materials in their native language. Teachers also use tiered vocabulary with these students during instruction. Teacher unit plans and lesson plans include differentiated instructional strategies. Scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition are utilized to assist these ELLS. Former ELLs are placed in mainstream classes, but teachers use tiered vocabulary with these students during instruction, and still include differentiated instructional strategies in their lesson plans. FOREIGN LANGUAGE Former ELLs have gone though the experience of learning a second language (English) to the point of succeeding and being competent enough to follow English mainstream classes. Most of them can take a foreign language class only after they lose their ELL status. Contrary to what many people may think, learning a third language is not a major difficulty for these students, at least in the initial levels. A problem with these students is that frequently they do not have enough time to complete the three years required to take the LOTE Regents-like exam, so they may require individualized strategies to reach the necessary exams and credits (e.g. they may be entitled to receive credits for education in their country after the age of 11, etc.). 2018-19 CEP 56  Most of these students can take the Regents or Common Core exams in their native language, which helps them to graduate. Additionally, many of them can take the Regents-like exam offered by NYC DOE in their own language, which can allow them to obtain an Advanced Regents Diploma. SIFEs and long-term ELLs show certain patterns of academic inconsistency (e.g. long term absentees, difficulty adapting to the school system, etc.) or simple difficulty in language acquisition. The first two cases require interventions that are beyond the scope of the Foreign Language Department, for which teachers will work in collaboration with parents, guidance counselors and other staff as adequate (Special Ed. department, school psychologist, etc.). Difficulty in language acquisition is directly related to the area of linguistic ability. For these students, our programs of native language arts constitute an excellent opportunity to both reinforce academic and linguistic strength, and give them some credits towards graduation. The Foreign Language Department works in close collaboration with the ENL and English Departments to assist these students in bridging the gap between their native language and English. Curriculum alignment and unified efforts in linguistic intervention strategies help these students. SPECIAL EDUCATION Faculty identifies Student With Disabilities and English Language Learners in STARS or Skedula, and in collaboration with the ENL Coordinator and guidance counselors to better differentiate their lessons and provide individual attention. Some of the techniques used in class are pairing students with peers that speak common languages, are in the same grade levels or obtained similar NYSESLAT scores, and using bilingual paraprofessionals. Within content area unit plans, accommodations and modifications are used such as reading materials in a range of reading levels, native languages, visuals, glossaries, dictionaries, use of graphic organizers, thinking map, modeling and technology is used to expand lesson and understanding by the use of images and videos to incorporate and connect previous knowledge of the diverse backgrounds of all students. ART, MUSIC, HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION Teachers are enabled to differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups by making certain that at PD workshops they are able to use the Skedula technology tool to identify their ELL populations and subgroups to incorporate differentiation modifications into daily lesson plans. SIFE students are met with individually and followed up with by guidance counselors to ensure proper programming to optimize student academic success. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Most of the students who are ELL and SWD in Forest Hills High School are in CTT classes. Teachers who teach SWD/ELLs rely on data supplied from Skedula, STARS, ATS and S.E.S.I.S. to identify students’ modification and create differentiated instruction to meet the academic needs of these students. They ensure that the requirements of the IEP are met, including separate location for testing, time extension and other such modifications. Scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition are utilized to assist these ELLS. Material is presented in a variety of ways, and students are given options to demonstrate what they have learned. Graphic organizers and manipulatives are used whenever possible to appeal to kinesthetic and/or visual learners, and to circumvent language barriers. Oral presentations and presentations that require technological aids are used to the benefit of students that have significant difficulty with written communication in English. We also emphasize vocabulary-building, exposure to various types of texts, and instruction that focuses on content-appropriate writing, in order to enhance the reading and writing abilities of our students. ELLs-SWDs are frequently given the option of working in small groups for support and assistance from the teachers. Our teachers instruct students in the use of content-specific vocabulary, and familiarize them with how such vocabulary may be used in other “everyday” contexts. ELL students are often given the option of working in homogenous groups by language and or NYSESLAT score for mutual support, as well as more targeted assistance from instructors. Students have access to glossaries, dictionaries, and other materials in their native languages. Tests are also often modified to better meet the needs of English Language Learners. In the English department, teachers use this data to create a baseline to assist in measuring student growth. In many math classes, mainstream teachers are paired with teachers of SWD. These classes contain ELLs who have low exam scores (standardized and/or school created) in mathematics. The curriculum is modified so that there is time for enrichment 2018-19 CEP 57  activities. Small group instruction with an emphasis on academic vocabulary and bilingual support is the preferred method of instruction. Manipulatives and technology are used often to offer visual advantages for the students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL/SWDs are usually placed in an inclusion (ICT) setting, looking with the School Based Support Team to move students from fully self-contained classes to the least restrictive environments (including Social Studies CTT and ELL classes). This provides greater access to the general education curriculum, while at the same time supplying and addressing all their academic needs and accommodations such as separate location and extended time for testing, and use of a paraprofessional for more individualized student attention, along with the support of the Special Education teacher and additional personnel. Teachers utilize Skedula and SESIS to understand their students’ IEP goals and English proficiency levels. Then they incorporate differentiated instructional strategies into their unit plans and lesson plans. All teachers are given PD on SESIS to identify their SWD student population as well as their ELL with SWD population. All IEP mandated modifications are adhered to. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school offers additional services like Title III classes, Saturday and PM school. Free tutoring is offered both by teachers during their preparation or Circular 6 periods, and by students of the Naitonal Honor Society. The Foreign Language department offers native language classes in several languages. Teachers in content area classes receive training on strategies for ELLs. Integrated co-teaching classes are offered in most departments. Programs like Castle Learning or Plato assist our students. Skills classes are especially designed for former ELLs as a transition to mainstream classes. Alternative paraprofessionals are provided in certain cases. ENGLISH Some examples of the school’s targeted intervention program revolve around the ELL subgroups and meeting their needs. Teachers identify their students’ sub groups using data from Skedula and the ENL Coordinator. Student programming is carefully monitored to ensure placement in proper level classes and with the appropriate licensed teachers. The English Department offers “Skill” level classes to assist with student transition from a complete ELL program to that of a mainstream English class environment. SCIENCE Living Environment: In order to address the specific needs of the current ELL population taking the Living Environment course, FHHS continues to group ELLs in Living Environment with a 2-year sequence. The population that takes Living Environment is in transition from middle school to high school. Allowing these students 2 years to complete the course curriculum provides students with more time to learn both science concepts and language skills, while adjusting to a new school environment. These students are grouped with other students who speak the same language so that they can assist one another daily during learning activities within the classroom. They are encouraged to use glossaries, dictionaries, and other materials in their native language. Teachers also use tiered vocabulary with these students during instruction. Teacher unit plans and lesson plans include differentiated instructional strategies. Scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition are utilized to assist these ELLs. Earth Science: We are also continuing to group ELL students in a one year Earth Science course. These students are grouped with other students who speak the same language so that they can assist one another regularly during learning activities within the classroom. They are encouraged to use glossaries, dictionaries, and other materials in their native language. Teachers also use tiered vocabulary with these students during instruction. Teacher unit plans and lesson plans include differentiated instructional strategies. Scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition are utilized to assist these ELLs. SOCIAL STUDIES In Social Studies, ELL students are identified and programmed heterogeneously by the NYSESLAT in the appropriate grade level 2018-19 CEP 58  course, Global I or 2, American History, Participation in Government and Economics. Tutoring is offered for ELLs, from teachers who work specifically with this population to peers. Our department does not offer Social Studies service in any language other than English. FOREIGN LANGUAGE Many students who are in the ENL program do not have space in their program to include a foreign language class, since they are required to take two ot three English classes depending on their ENL level (one or two ENL and one English class). This means that the number of ELLs in non-native Spanish, French or Italian classes is low. To provide these students with an opportunity to take a class in the Foreign Language Department, the Spanish (native track) and Chinese (Regents and AP) classes are mostly for native students, irrespective of their ENL status (many of them have tested out of ENL in previous years). Most students in the Hebrew class are also native speakers. SPECIAL EDUCATION ELLs are identified and their previous and current academic performances are available to all relevant staff. Teachers that assist these students are provided with proven, strategies to best meet the needs of this student population. Students that are eligible for ELL services are programmed accordingly. ART, MUSIC, HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION These departments offer one on one as well as small group tutoring for all students as part of a teachers Circular 6 assignment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ENGLISH: For the 2013-2014 school year, FHHS is using and Castle Learning as an outside resource to assist ELL students with their academic progress and language acquisition. MATHEMATICS: A few of the teachers requested ‘small group instruction’ for their circular 6 professional assignment. Math AP will assign ELL students for these group sessions with teachers. SCIENCE: This past year, we participated in a pilot ELL STEM After-School program. The teachers collaborated to organize and shape science curriculum for ELL students. We partnered with the Oceanic Research Group and focused on utilizing different strategies to support out ELL students. The students were able to produce a work product that was aligned to the CCLS. Additionally, this upcoming year, teachers with a strong background and passion in language were programmed to teach the ELL science classes. These teachers will be provided with additional support throughout the year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program/services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL’s are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELL students are included in all activities, programs, classes, clubs and class electives that FHHS as to offer (e.g. in Social Studies, electives available to ELLs include Law, NYC History, Facing History, etc.). They also have access to Advanced Placement classes and special programs where appropriate and when it works with their schedule, allowing exposure to enhanced college readiness and rigor. FHHS ELL students can take advantage of small group tutoring as well as one to one tutoring through the English Department. ELLs have access to all of the school wide tutoring and weekend and after school programs the school runs in Social Studies. Title III, AM & PM classes, Saturday school, and summer school, are all geared towards providing English Language Learners equal access to school programs. These different scheduling options and alternative opportunities for earning credits 2018-19 CEP 59  makes flexible programming possible and gives ELLs numerous avenues for academic achievement. To help ELLs with credit accumulation, an Art Appreciation class has been created specifically for them this year. Other classes are offered to ELLs during the February and April breaks in certain disciplines. Para-professionals are also available in various languages such as Spanish, French, Punjabi, Urdu, Russian, Polish, Mandarin and Greek to provide students with one-on-one assistance. Translators ease communications with non-English- speaking parents or guardians, and important documents (report cards, lunch forms, etc. are available in multiple languages. In 2014-15, the Science Department participated in a pilot ELL STEM After-School program. The Science and ENL teachers collaborated to organize and shape science curriculum for ELL students. FHHS partnered with the Oceanic Research Group and focused on utilizing different strategies to support out ELL students. The students were able to produce a work product that was aligned to the CCLS. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At FHHS, all classrooms are equipped with Smart boards encouraging teachers to expose their students to technology and interactive lessons. Technology is utilized in all classes. Lessons are presented on Smart boards to show images, graphic organizers and animations to assist ELLs, which is beneficial since the visuals can enhance learning for students with limited English proficiency. All ENL and English teachers use CCS in all lessons to increase skills building, add rigor and prepare students for college level assignments and assessments. Teachers utilize tiered reading documents, visual and audio tools to meet and address various student learning styles. Glossaries are distributed to ELL students to help support them in the content area. Important exams are available in a variety of languages. Differentiated instruction and tiered reading also provide ELL students with skills-appropriate opportunities for learning. Title III classes utilize the blended learning model. In Math, glossaries are distributed to ELL students to help support them in the content area. Students are also shown how to use calculators. Teachers stress academic vocabulary and this year there will be ‘word walls’ created in math classes. In Social Studies and other disciplines, teachers have brought in support materials across a variety of levels. For example, they have Teacher Created Materials packets, leveled texts and textbooks that include rigorous primary readings. Classes such as Global Studies through Film and U.S. History through Film which are less reliant on traditional texts, provide some ELL students with an alternative means of accessing Social Studies curriculum. Our Music and Art curricula are aligned to Common Core State Standards and The NYC Blueprint for Arts Education in that they incorporate a writing, speaking and performing component that facilitates academic success for all of our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As of October 29, 2015, the 3860 students of Forest Hills High School speak 66 different languages in their respective homes. English is the home language of 39% of the students. The main language groups are Spanish (24%), Russian (13%) and Chinese (7%). The school provides glossaries and dictionnaries in several languages (including subgroups like Uzbek or Bengali), Regenst exams are offered in the languages that are available, bilingual paraprofessionals, guidance counselors and teachers assist frequently, and students in the National Honor Society offer bilingual tutoring. FHHS’ Foreign Language Department offers 7 languages (Spanish, Chinese, French, Italian, Hebrew, Latin and American Sign Language). These programs serve many native or heritage speakers of these languages (except Latin). For Spanish and Chinese, there are separate classes for native/heritage speakers. The school also programs many students to take the LOTE Regents-like exams in the students’ native language whenever available. Important tests are available in different languages. The school has 2018-19 CEP 60  different cultural clubs (Spanish Honor Society, Chinese Club, French Club, Judaica Club, etc.). Many of our students attend PM or weekend classes in their respective languages at their local communities or religious services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are part of the guidance counselors’ caseloads. Caseloads are divided by grade levels. Placement in ENL classes is strictly done according to the students' NYSESLAT scores, which guarantees that they receive ENL services based on their level of English proficiency. Placement in content area classes, including English where appropriate, is done according to the students' grade level, which makes these classes age-homogeneous. Since ELLs have equal full access to all FHHS activities and clubs, ELLs are invited to participate in the same conditions as any other student. When they need linguistic support, they request it to their ENL teacher, to the ENL Coordinator, the AP of ENL or other personnel like the counselors, Senior Officer, AP of Guidance, etc. This assistance for participation in activities is provided in different forms, normally based on individual student needs: student is paired up with another student of the same language/origin, students of the National Honor Society, conferences with the club advisor, etc. ELLs are represented in all programs in equal conditions are the rest of students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At FHHS, all classrooms are equipped with Smart boards encouraging teachers to expose their students to technology and interactive lessons. Technology is utilized in all classes. Lessons are presented on Smart boards to show images, graphic organizers and animations to assist ELLs, which is beneficial since the visuals can enhance learning for students with limited English proficiency. All ENL and English teachers use CCS in all lessons to increase skills building, add rigor and prepare students for college level assignments and assessments. Teachers utilize tiered reading documents, visual and audio tools to meet and address various student learning styles. Glossaries are distributed to ELL students to help support them in the content area. Important exams are available in a variety of languages. Differentiated instruction and tiered reading also provide ELL students with skills-appropriate opportunities for learning. Title III classes utilize the blended learning model. In Math, glossaries are distributed to ELL students to help support them in the content area. Students are also shown how to use calculators. Teachers stress academic vocabulary and this year there will be ‘word walls’ created in math classes. In Social Studies and other disciplines, teachers have brought in support materials across a variety of levels. For example, they have Teacher Created Materials packets, leveled texts and textbooks that include rigorous primary readings. Classes such as Global Studies through Film and U.S. History through Film which are less reliant on traditional texts, provide some ELL students with an alternative means of accessing Social Studies curriculum. Our Music and Art curricula are aligned to Common Core State Standards and The NYC Blueprint for Arts Education in that they incorporate a writing, speaking and performing component that facilitates academic success for all of our ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Understanding that parents/guardians are important partners in a child’s education, one of FHHS’s goals is to increase parental communication so as to increase student academic success. FHHS aims at promoting the role of parents as active partners in their child’s education. Parents participate in the enrollment and articulation process. Interpreters are provided at all meetings, including the Open House. 2018-19 CEP 61  Students are invited to attend our summer school Title III program, in an effort to acclimate them to the school. Additionally connections are established through the ENL Coordinator, who “buddies” up new students with seasoned, experienced students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish: Spanish Conversation Spanish Media Spanish for Business Advanced Placement – Spanish Language and Culture Advanced Placement - Spanish Literature Chinese: Advanced Placement – Chinese French: French 4 Advanced Placement – French Latin: Latin Enrichment 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Regular meetings during the year are held with ENL teachers and content area teachers serving ELLs. The ENL teachers have one period a day of Common Planning Time to meet and discuss their classes, their students, their strategies and their lessons. Additionally, they meet on a regular basis (weekly or biweekly) with Social Studies, Englsh and Science teachers to share materials and strategies. Teachers of ELLs are encouraged to participate in external professional development activities (e.g. Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, workshops, etc.). Training for NYSESLAT is always provided, as mandated. Data concerning ELLs is regularly discussed by the Assistant Principal of ENL and the ENL Coordinator with the teachers. Guidance counselors participate in review of ELL data at bi-weekly department meetings. Strategies for parental outreach are discussed as well as ongoing interaction with the ELL teachers. ENGLISH At each monthly English Department meeting, the agenda reflects a professional concept or concern regarding the school’s 2018-19 CEP 62  ELL/SWD population. The teachers create and expand on dialogue regarding the needs and academic concerns that each teacher and class experience. Each assistant principal in consultation with the principal added additional the categories of SWD/ELL to the school’s PD plan to ensure all student needs are addressed. New for the 2014-2015 school year, all teachers will be engaged in CPT (Common Planning Time) twice a week. During these times, subject area teachers were encouraged to meet with ELL teachers to discuss best practices, student achievement and how to apply CCS to instruction. All FHHS teachers attend faculty and department meetings once a month where ELL and SWD are discussed. Additionally, there are three Chancellor PD days in November, January and June. During these sessions, a portion of the day is dedicated to teacher articulation on grade level to discuss the needs of the students and share successful classroom techniques and resources. MATHEMATICS The Assistant Principal of Mathematics and the point person for ELLs will be responsible for coordinating staff development this year. On November’s professional development day, there will be a training session to explain the data. Prior to presenting for the department, teachers have discussed the research and general strategies (listed below) for a portion of department conferences. The Assistant Principal of Mathematics will share additional research with the department; which includes strategies for adopting the common core with ELLs. Teachers will also be expected to use ARIS Learn as a resource and the AP Mathematics will continue to investigate on-line learning opportunities for teachers who prefer this mode of PD. To summarize the research, all math teachers should: 1) Incorporate small groups – interaction is important 2) Vary math instruction and provide interesting problems 3) Teach math vocabulary 4) Pause frequently 5) Paraphrase often 6) Emphasize key ideas and vocabulary through intonation 7) Write key terms and concepts on the board 8) Use pronouns clearly 9) Shorten sentences 10) Increase wait time for students to answer and process information 11) Use Manipulative Purposefully 12) Incorporate technology purposefully SCIENCE The Assistant Principal, Supervision Science, will coordinate all Professional Development activities. ELL Science teachers will continue with their inquiry team to research effective strategies that will address the unique needs of ELL students. Teachers will share best practice to provide differentiated instruction to their student. There will also be teacher training on Skedula to identify the data of ELL students. The Assistant Principal will also utilize monthly department meetings and professional development days to provide teachers with material that will assist them in teaching science to ELL students. Intervisitation between ELL Science teachers and ENL teachers will also be encouraged. SOCIAL STUDIES The teaching of ELL students is included during the monthly department meetings on Social Studies. In addition, we have held, and will continue to hold, specific sessions on professional development days that focus on the needs of ELL students and the methods that we can incorporate into our classes that will help them achieve academic success. Our teachers have been sent to outside training in literacy development, which is turn keyed to the department, and we continue to seek out opportunities for growth. FOREIGN LANGUAGE The Assistant Principal, Supervision Foreign Language, coordinates all Professional Development Activities. Foreign Language 2018-19 CEP 63  teachers will meet regularly on professional development days to analyze the situation of ELLs in the department (both in regular classes and in native language arts). Foreign Language teachers will integrate the use of data from Skedula and from the ENL Department to assist them in their approach to these students. It is an ongoing policy of the Foreign Language department to invite teachers to attend training sessions about ELLs provided by the NYCDOE, BETAC and other institutions. Intervisitations with teachers in other departments, mainly ENL, English and Social Studies are encouraged, so that teachers can know other content areas and better assist ELLs in their classes ART, MUSIC, HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION Teachers are given handouts during the year, and discussions take place during professional development days using the resources describing best-practice strategies available for working with students that are ELL’s from the NYCDOE website. During department meetings, as part of the agenda, best practice strategies for ELL’s are discussed and reviewed. All teachers are given the opportunity to attend workshops pertaining to ELL’s offered through the DOE and OELL. The minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff is met throughout the year during department meetings and faculty meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff is invited to participate in freshmen and parents orientation, where translators are customarily provided for new parents and students. Teachers of the lower grades or classes are given professional advice and assisted in the integration of new ELLs. Each monthly department meeting and faculty conference include a section of professional development, which is frequently devoted to ELL related content. This is memoralized in agendas and minutes. Regular meeting between the ENL teachers and the content area teachers include interprofessional training on strategies for ELLs, content area teaching for ELLs, etc. All teachers will participate this year in Common Planning Time during period 3 or 9 twice a week to create meaningful discussion regarding the progress and future progress of all students, including ELLs and F-ELLs. Teachers will memorialize their discussion, best practices, lesson ideas, data, assessment and discussion and engagement techniques in minutes to be kept in a binder for all to review, and be informed of what great ideas are coming from each department. Staff Development days in November, January and June each have two hours of PD, a portion of which will be focusing on ELL training. All teachers are encouraged to attend professional development activities and workshops outside of our building to expand their knowledge of ELL strategies. The school often allows them to attend during their work time. Teachers will turnkey what they learn to their colleagues. The AP will keep records of agendas and attendance of the ELL professional development that teachers participate in. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Understanding that parents/guardians are important partners in a child’s education, one of FHHS’s goals is to increase parental communication so as to increase student academic success. FHHS aims at promoting the role of parents as active partners in their child’s education. Correspondence specific to FHHS is done in Chinese, Hebrew, Russian and Spanish. Translation funds are used for translators 2018-19 CEP 64  for parent meetings, workshops and conferences. Telephone calls are made in Chinese, Hebrew, Russian and Spanish. The Guidance counselors will be conducting parent/guardian information sessions every term in the prominent languages other than English found in the Forest Hills High School community. Separate workshops will be held in Chinese, Spanish and Russian. Interpreters will be available for a general meeting for other languages as requested. The College counselors will be conducting parent/guardian information sessions every term in the prominent languages other than English found in the Forest Hills High School community. Separate workshops will be held in Chinese, Spanish and Russian. Interpreters will be available for a general meeting for other languages as requested. Assistance in the college application process as well as the financial aid process will be an integral part of these meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. [Answer for question 2 is provided here because there is no space under the question] Records are maintained for all students during all interactions with guidance counselor. Every student’s records are maintained in folders in locked cabinets to insure confidentiality. Folders for all sub-groups, including ELL students, are color coded to insure that all concerns regarding ELL students are addressed. Translators are available for conferencing, and when a low-incidence language translator is needed the DOE translation service is utilized. Letters regarding student attendance and progress are translated in multiple languages. [Answer for question 3:] The guidance department invites parents to numerous meetings, held approximately bi-monthly to discuss all aspects of student progress and college and career readiness. Topics include: The Road to College, Financial Aid, the new assessments (SAT and ACT), PSAT preparation, Parent-Teacher conferences, programming, mental health issues, substance abuse, students who are over age and under credited, suicide prevention. At all meetings, translators are available in the three high incidence languages: Spanish, Russian and Mandarin. There have been situations where outside translators were hired for American Sign Language and Bengali. Guidance counselors as well as other school personnel contact parents/guardians by telephone, in their home language whenever possible, as per the ATS records, to apprise them of their child’s progress and needs. During these phone conferences there have been many adjustments made that will help insure the success of the student. Parents/guardians are also contacted by mail in their home –when possible, in their home language- for all city wide mandated correspondence. Additionally, DOE and in-house translation services are available to teachers as well as guidance counselors to best collaborate with families in order to successfully meet the needs of the students and the parents/guardians. The school does not have a parent coordinator. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ben Sherman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Forest Hills High School School DBN: 28Q440 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ben Sherman Title Principal Raúl Macías Assistant Principal Suzanna Khaimova Parent Coordinator Johanna Colon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Wililam Perkins Parent N. Anastasiadis Teacher/Subject Area Rochelle Casalan Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach María Caamaño School Counselor Juan Méndez Pierre Galvez Nicole Lee Anna Cho Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ESL Coordinator Other LAB-BESIS Coordinator Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Forest Hills High School Superintendent: Juan M DBN: 28Q440 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Suzanna Khaimova Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ATS Report, RPOB, is used to determine the home language of all students. The names of new admits appear in red on the ATS "RLBA" screen. This indicates that the student's home language must be entered. In order to enter the accurate home language, the parent/guardian must complete the Home Language Identification Survey. Following an interview with the parent/guardian, the ENL Coordinator enters the home language on ATS. After the home language is entered on ATS, we are able to print out the student's NYSITELL answer sheet. Unless the student's home language is recorded on ATS, a NYSITELL answer document cannot be printed. If the language entered is "NO" (i.e., home language is English), then the student's name is removed from the RLBA screen and the NYSITELL is not administered. 2018-19 CEP 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AL AM AO AR BG BL BM BS BU CB CH CN CR DA DU FR GE GJ GK GR HA HE HG HI IN IT JA KO MB MN NA NE NO PA PI PJ 15 2 0 36 79 1 1 3 3 1 322 0 1 9 1 5 2 4 2 3 4 14 1 20 17 4 5 6 0 0 6 10 3572 1 7 21 0.25 0.03 0 0.61 1.34 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.02 5.46 0 0.02 0.15 0.02 0.08 0.03 0.07 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.24 0.02 0.34 0.29 0.07 0.08 0.1 0 0 0.1 0.17 60.54 0.02 0.12 0.36 14 2 2 35 91 1 1 3 3 0 281 4 1 9 1 5 2 3 2 3 4 14 1 19 18 4 5 5 1 38 6 9 3560 1 6 21 0.24 0.03 0.03 0.59 1.54 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.05 0 4.76 0.07 0.02 0.15 0.02 0.08 0.03 0.05 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.24 0.02 0.32 0.31 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.02 0.64 0.1 0.15 60.34 0.02 0.1 0.36 2018-19 CEP 70  PL PO RO RU SC SF SI SO SP SX TG TH TI TU TZ UD UR UZ VN 32 6 3 377 7 2 2 1 1195 3 1 6 8 4 6 18 5 42 4 0.54 0.1 0.05 6.39 0.12 0.03 0.03 0.02 30 1 2 375 7 2 2 1 20.25 1200 0.05 0.02 0.1 0.14 0.07 0.1 0.31 0.08 0.71 0.07 3 1 6 9 5 7 18 5 43 3 0.51 0.1 0.03 6.36 0.12 0.03 0.03 0.02 20.34 0.05 0.02 0.1 0.15 0.08 0.12 0.31 0.08 0.73 0.05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. No language represents at least 10% of our population out of the excluded ones. Only Spanish represents 10% or more. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 71  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families In addition to all mandated translated letters provided by NYCDOE, school specific documents are translated by staff members and include: Parent/Guardian Workshops (6 times a school year) Parent Association Meetings (Monthly, 2 nd Tuesday) Attendance Letter (as needed) Letters Requesting Parent/Guardian Meeting with Staff Member (as needed) Letter Regarding Student’s Regents (January and June) NYSESLAT Information (April) Physical Education Class Information (September, February, June) Locker Room Procedures (September) Tutoring Schedule (October) Please see left column for each document Related Service Providers Welcome Letter (October) Title III Program (October) Summer Enrichment Title III Program (June) Forest Hills High School uses the Skedula. Skedula is a student data program in which ATS and STARS academic and biographical data are gathered together to provide teachers, parents, and students with personal information, grades, transcripts, attendance, and other information. Skedula is split into three separate websites: one for teachers, one for students, and one for parents. We are able to communicate with parents who do not communicate in English at home using Skedula in a number of ways. Teachers are able to send letters home to parents automatically translated into their home language. Also, when parents log into the “Parent Site” of Skedula, there is a tab for them to click and that will translate the entire parent site of Skedula into their home language. There are dozens of plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In September, he school compiles data on languages spoken/written by staff members. Any staff member or department in need of translation services during the year will contact the corresponding Assistant Principal or the Language Coordinator to request the service. The translation is done by a bilingual staff member in a timely manner. In the case of languages for which no staff member is available for translation, staff members are aware that DOE translation and interpretation services are available. For non-covered languages, the school will use 2018-19 CEP 72  languages available for the parent to choose from based on their Home Language selection in ATS. the DOE vendor "TheBigWord". 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Teacher-Parent/Guardian Meetings Guidance Counselor-Parent/Guardian Meetings ISS-Parent/Guardian Meetings Administrator and Supervisor-Parent/Guardian Meetings Parent Association Meetings (Monthly, 2nd Tuesday) Parent-Teacher Afternoon and Evening Conferences Attendance Teacher Meetings As needed October and March As needed Teacher and Guidance Counselor Phone Calls to Parents Daily interpretation service(s)? The person who is responsible for a school meeting can request interpretation services to the Language Coordinator and/or the corresponding Assistant Principal, who can find translators for the main languages represented in our school (Spanish, Russian, Chinese). For other languages or in specific cases (e.g. phone conversation), school staff are aware of DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. Translators are provided for Spanish, Russian and Chinese (and, on request, for American Sign Language) Translators are provided for Spanish, Russian and Chinese (and, on request, for American Sign Language) Interpretation can be requested to the corresponding Assistant Principal or Language Access Coordinator, who will seek a suitable staff member able to translate. Bilingual staff members frequently help generously/spontaneously without LAC mediation. For languages for which no staff member can translate, school staff are aware of DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of an emergency, the school uses a mass phone messaging system through which communications to parents can be sent in the major four languages of the school (English, Spanish, Russian, Chinese). The messages can be 2018-19 CEP 73  recorded by bilingual school staff. The school also uses Skedula, a program that allows to send mass e-mails to parents and students who have registered (at 9/19/2017, 75% of students and 35% of parents are registered). The school is making constant efforts through guidance counselors, deans, teachers and other key personnel to have parents and students register in order to ensure more effective communication. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are aware of how to use translation services and over-the-phone interpretation services because it is an agenda item in a Faculty Conference and in Department Conferences. Since the school’s primary form of staff communication is e-mail, information on the Translation and Interpretation Unit is e-mailed to all staff members. Language Palm Cards are distributed to staff members and are also available at the front/security desk, main office and in the Pupil Personnel Services offices. All staff members receive a copy of the “I Speak…” card which includes the phone number for over-the-phone interpretation. The “I Speak” card is distributed to all staff before very Parent/Guardian event including Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent/guardian Workshops. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 are emailed and reviewed by all administrators and supervisor to fulfill parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. Parents/guardians in need of language access services are not prevented in reaching the school’s staff due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We solicit feedback from the School Leadership Team and Parent Association Meetings by including it as an Agenda Item. Staff reviews information from the Parent Survey and develops plans for improvement. The PA Executive Board serves as a focus group to gather feedback. 2018-19 CEP 74 
