2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q485 School Name: GROVER CLEVELAND HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MARC PASCENTE 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information GROVER CLEVELAND HIGH SCHOOL 24Q485 342400011485 9-12 School Number (DBN): 21-27 Himrod Street, Ridgewood,NY 11385 718-381-9600 718-417-8457 Phone Number: Marc A. Pascente Fax: mpascente@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Marc A. Pascente Brian Gavin Alison Timko, Phillip Soliman Brian Gavin Phillip Soliman Josh Castano AmourelleBornes N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-3157 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Queens North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Marc A. Pascente Brian Gavin Alison Timko Rafael Sarduy Phillip Soliman Josh Castano Amourelle Bornes N/A Gregory Ambrosini Chris Sullivan Steven Colbert Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Alternate 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Tony Cipolla NashiraLynton Maria Villegas Rosalyn Martinez Nancy Rivera Christine Viana IreneOliva Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Teacher Alternate Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide the services and rigorous course work our students need to succeed beyond high school in a culturally diverse setting. Therefore, almost our entire budget is dedicated to full time personnel-teachers, support staff and administration. Additional funding is utilized to provide extended day services such as extra help, blended courses, sports and clubs and a Saturday program. Students entering the Ninth Grade engage in Common Core coursework, with supports such as double period ELA class for students below the 50th percentile in literacy. All students choose their Career and Technical Education (CTE) pathway or “major” for grades 10 through 12 in one of the following areas: Pre-Engineering, Information Technology, Entrepreneurship, Hospitality and Tourism, Water Safety Instructor/ Lifeguarding, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT), Visual Arts, Music, or Theater. Many of the career pathways have a culminating technical exam. Last year, our students successfully passed these exams and were granted advanced status, college credit, industry certification/licensure or all three. Over 50 students were certified as lifeguards/water safety instructors; 100% of the students passed the Emergency Medical Technician ( EMT and CFR), National Occupational Competence Testing Institute (NOCTI) Hospitality and Tourism and Virtual Enterprise Exams, Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and First Aid tests; and over 80% of the students passed the C-Tech Media Installation and Database Exams. Now that we have students taking full sequences of courses, we will be applying for CTE program approval this year. When approved, these programs will enable students to receive Advanced Regents Diplomas, whereas now they benefit the students but it does not elevate their diploma status. Grover Cleveland HS also offers 12 Advanced Placement courses and 6 College Now courses through LaGuardia Community College each year. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Grover Cleveland High School ‘s diverse student population mirrors the community it serves, which is primarily the Ridgewood, Glendale, Maspeth, Bushwick, and Williamsburg neighborhoods. Students from other areas of Queens and New York City attend our school, as well, creating an international atmosphere of respect and tolerance. The school continues to welcome and educate students who are new to the country and New York City. As the demographics of the neighborhoods shift, so does our population. This year at Grover Cleveland High School (GCHS), over 40 different languages and cultures are spoken and represented. Our population is diverse and celebrated. As a comprehensive high school, we continue to provide a supportive environment for our students and their families. We have various programs for our students with special needs, including programs for the visually impaired, alternate assessment classes, integrated co-teaching, self–contained, and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) classes. Students choose and enter an academy but are given the 9th grade courses they failed while still taking some 10th grade courses. We provide our English Language Learners (ELLs) with English as a Second Language (ESL) and/or Bilingual Spanish content area classes according to parent choice, with a focus on college and career readiness. Our ESL program provides classes for all levels of English Language proficiency. Supports for our ELL’s include the use of technology and software such as Achieve 3000 to give students targeted practice with reading and language. To further address the needs of our ELL population, we established the BELA (Bridge to English Language Acquisition) Academy for our entering and emerging/low intermediate students. All ninth grade students choose and enter an academy. Students who do not meet promotion requirements are given a hybrid program with 9th grade courses they failed and some 10th grade courses in the Academy they chose. We offer workshops and information sessions at our Parent’s Association (PA) meetings and throughout the year on topics such as: adolescent mental health issues, ESL, and using technology to help our students. Our students participate in various after school activities including 28 PSAL sports teams, extracurricular programs with the YMCA and Vaughn College, Key Club, LGBTQ and Student Council. We pride ourselves in giving back to the community and have developed partnerships with neighboring elementary schools. Our yearly Fall Festival gives local elementary students a safe trick or treat haven complete with arts, crafts, games, goodies and a live haunted house. Our lifeguarding/water safety instructor students teach children ages 4 – 9 to swim every Friday afternoon. We have partnered with elementary school PS 290, to provide soccer and swim programs. Our students run Blood Drives with the Red Cross, participate in numerous charitable events with community organizations, and visit senior citizen 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  centers to facilitate technology workshops or perform music. Our mobile App development class participates in Y-PLAN each year, a program developed at the University of California - Berkeley that showcases student’s skills in order to help resolve a community issue. For the fourth year, our students are invited to present their “Apps” at the NYC and national Y-PLAN conferences. The Apps class this past year focused on all aspects of Forest Park in partnership with Councilwoman Crowley's office, the parks department and the local historical societies. The year prior, they worked on the mayor’s Vision Zero initiative. To date, we have close to 230 Apps available on Google Play. We engage parents through the workshops and information sessions at our Parent’s Association (PA) meetings and throughout the year on topics such as: adolescent mental health issues, cyber bullying, ESL, and using technology to help our students. Our school has implemented several shifts in structure and pedagogy over the last few years that have changed the way we teach and students learn. We have embarked upon a continuous journey of improvement centered on increasing college and career opportunities for our students and creating a culture of achievement. Our fundamental belief is that student engagement is the key to student success. The administrators and faculty have focused on increasing student engagement in every classroom by implementing engaging strategies on a daily basis. Engagement and formative assessment in daily lessons through scaffolded questioning and discussion is present. Common Core Learning Standards and shifts are being integrated into units and lessons, raising the level of rigor in every content area. Our students all have access to CTE and Arts programs of their choice, Foreign Languages, Advanced Placement and College level courses. This remains true even as some of our funding sources have changed or have been diminished. We believe it is important to do more for students with what resources we have. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations and their Needs GCHS has a significant at -risk population. Our overall population has decreased over the last 3 years, but our ELL and SWD populations have remained constant so that the demographics have begun to shift. During the 2015-2016 school year, the student population was approximately 23 % English Language Learners, 62 % eligible for Free Lunch, and 18 % students with disabilities. Our school has a sizable over-aged, under- credited population, which necessitates additional credit accrual opportunities, so that they can graduate with their cohort or shortly thereafter. We have a significant population of students who have recently arrived in this country, Entering or Emerging ENL students, as well as long term ELL’s and Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) who exhibit different needs and have different mandates than those of our other students. It is anticipated that these students will remain in these levels in September with additional new arrivals being assigned to GCHS. With the revised Part 154 requirements, these students will need more native language arts, English as a Second Language, an integrated ENL/ELA course and bilingual or ESL supported science and social studies instruction. GCHS has historically attracted alternately-assessed SWD students because of its comprehensive elective course offerings. As the school has increased its CTE offerings, parents of students with special needs choose GCHS to prepare their children for a viable career after high school. This special population has remained constant as the reputation of GCHS’ CTE programs grows. Since the SWD credentials for this population are not recognized, these students impact negatively on the graduation rate of the school. Yet, they require special services that will enable them to achieve CDOS or the Skills and Achievement Commencement credentials. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools GCHS made significant gains in the element of Collaborative Teachers. Small Learning Communities conduct weekly inquiry sessions to review progress with student subgroups and targeted academic skills, data-informed collaborative planning once per week, and SLC information and event planning sessions once per week. The SLC team inquiry 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  meetings are resulting in analysis of student work and an interdisciplinary focus on common core literacy skills. SLC teams plan interventions and supports for struggling students after individual case conferences. These meetings include the review of attendance, anecdotal, transcripts, real-time grades and progress that inform interventions and supports. These interventions may include faculty-parent meetings, in class strategies, incentives, attendance monitoring and evaluation, tutoring, and mentoring. While GCHS faculty has made significant progress in the element of Rigorous instruction, this will remain the key focus area for the upcoming school year. Teachers and content area supervisors have aligned lessons and units to the common core and NYS standards. In addition, teachers constantly review their lessons to address data driven best practices and ensure they are present during instruction. Questioning and discussion has been revised and improved to include evidence based prompts. Our teachers are engaging in continuous formative classroom assessment but it continues to be an area of development. Class activities in each lesson are literacy based and correspond to literacy standards. Teachers and assistant principals have begun working to ensure that multiple entry points for ELLs and IEP students are present in all lessons and units. These lesson and unit plans will be evaluated and the assistant principals of supervision will provide actionable feedback. Teachers who are recognized as having highly effective differentiation practices will share them during SLC and department meetings. Teachers have received professional development in Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy; continued professional learning opportunities for teachers are still needed for students to have opportunities to answer complex questions daily. Lesson plans will be evaluated to ensure that higher-order questions and corresponding scaffolds are included. Observations of lessons will address questioning and discussions and daily checks for understanding. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q485 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1775 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 194 185 9 45 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 18 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 68.4% % Reduced Lunch 18.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 63.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 18.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.17 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 65% 58.6% 7.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 144 63 48 83.0% 3.0% 18.5% 5.5% 9.7% 2.1% 16 22% 8 N/A N/A 74% 64% 70.6% 15% N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH YSH NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A YES NO 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and academic tasks emphasis higher order skills for all learners  The school has partnered with High School That Work to Implement the Literacy Design Collaborative (LDC) model for Common Core implementation across the content areas.  Teachers use the EQIP (Educators Evaluating the Quality of Instructional Products) rubric to assess the alignment of lesson/unit plans and curricula to the CCLS and multiple access points for all students 11/14 Developing for Tenet 3 – Curriculum Development and Support. Areas for Improvement:  Use of appropriate planning elements is not uniform throughout all subjects and classes. Although some teachers are attempting to align unit and lesson plans to the CCLS, they do not regularly integrate all components, such as differentiation and higher-order questions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16   Review of lesson plans showed that most teachers who include differentiation typically identify general instructional strategies or procedures, such as “organize activities where students interact explicitly” or “connect learning to student knowledge and experience,” rather than designating specific activities or materials that address specific student needs. Instructional extensions for advanced students are not included in most lesson plans.   Teachers do not uniformly plan a curriculum or effective lessons using data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols to address the needs of students, including those with disabilities and ELLs, nor is there evidence of consistent curricular planning for the use of complex materials and questions that promote higher-order thinking and peer-to-peer discussion.  Teachers do not consistently give feedback that pinpoints specific skills and strategies, and teachers do not regularly use data to plan and modify curricula. School Quality Review, April, 2015, Focus Areas:  Lessons do not consistently provide supports for a diversity of learners, particularly English language learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWD) and do not challenge all students to their full potential, thus limiting opportunities for them to engage in higher order thinking tasks and discussions  Teaching practices inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula and student work products and discussions reflect uneven levels of student thinking and participation.  Class lessons lack extension activities for advanced students. There were some opportunities for students to engage in discussions like ‘turn and talk.' However, evidence of this deep level of thinking, peer-to-peer discussions, debates, or building on each others ideas was only evident in a few classes. Prioritized areas of need: Teachers need to adjust lessons to provide multiple entry points, scaffolds, and extensions so that the needs of all learners are met. Teachers need to embed more authentic opportunities for students to engage in discussion and higher order thinking activities Teachers need structured time to engage in curriculum development based on Data Driven Instruction models of analysis Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, English as a New Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will improve their ability to respond critically to CCLS aligned written tasks and assessments as a result of improved rigor and access across all content areas and in Literacy Design Collaborative modules, as measured by a 3% increase in the number of students passing core subject classes on scholarship reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will continue to be trained in the Literacy Design Collaborative curriculum development protocol through partnership with High Schools that Work.Teachers develop unit plans that reflect the literacy or mathematics instructional shifts. These unit plans are reviewed by assistant principals and actionable feedback is provided ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies Teachers Teachers who received a developing or ineffective final Measures of Teaching Practice (MOTP) rating last school year Teachers will incorporate scaffolds, enrichment opportunities and discussion protocols into units and lessons as a way of improving access for all learners Teachers will implement unit and lesson plans that utilize Universal Design for Learning principles to develop multiple entry points for all students, including advanced learners Teachers will use the EQ iP rubric to measure lesson and unit effectiveness and self assess Teachers will continue to align pedagogical practices with curricular supports so that curricular adjustments can be implemented effectively Sept. 2018-June 2019 Borough Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals, Department Coordinators, High Schools that Work Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teacher Development and Evaluation Coaches All assistant principals of supervision and principal Teachers will engage in weekly inquiry to review data, including item skills analysis reports and student work, to determine student needs for scaffolding and enrichment All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, SLC Coordinators ● BELA Academy teachers will continue to revise curriculum maps, new units and lesson plans designed specifically for beginners, entering/low intermediate, and emerging ELL students that focuses on language acquisition and proficiency in order to enhance all learning for college and career readiness. BELA Academy teachers Teachers, Assistant Principals Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant principal of ESL/Foreign Language, Borough Instructional Leads Principal, Borough Instructional Leads. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  ENL Teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities to enhance multiple entry point strategies and higher–order thinking tasks and questions for emergent English speakers Content area courses will continue to incorporate literacy standards into skills and activities for each lesson and unit plan Revised curriculum maps and explanation of content area units will be shared with the community during parent meetings, through written notification and during SLT meetings. Supervision, Principal Assistant Principals of Supervision Science, Social Studies CTE, and Math teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal/CTE teachers Parents/ Guardians of students enrolled in 3 or 4 semester Common Core Algebra Courses Sept 2018 and February 2019 Sept 2018 and February 2019 Assistant principal of Mathematics Mathematics teachers Assistant Principal, PPS, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Association meetings will include presentations about each subject area and requirements for courses, regents and AP / College Level Courses. Assistant Principals of each subject area will present their information to parents. Parent/ Teacher events in Fall and Spring will give teachers and parents opportunities to speak specifically about how to support their individual children with coursework. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem allocation • Per Session Allocation • Postage Allocation • Coverage for two teachers to attend a total of six professional development training • Collaborative planning time for the two Algebra 2 teachers • Funding for two class sets of textbooks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1st 2019, administrators and teachers will review and evaluate writing assignments, rubrics, and student work samples and adjust instructional practices,specifically for SWD and ENL students as observed through Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Subject area teams will review student work using various protocols. If necessary, adjustments in instruction will be implemented and observable through observations utilizing Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: School Quality Review: April 27th 2015 School leaders and staff communicate high expectations and establish a culture for learning that offers ongoing feedback to students and families. Data Trends: Student attendance has been stagnant, rising from 79% in 2013-14 to 85% in 2015-16 to 82% in 2017-18. Graduation rates have shown improvement, but have stagnated rising from 58% in 2013-14 to 63% in 2015-16, 66% in 2016-17 and 63% in 2017-18. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Review 11/14 Tenet 5: Developing Areas for Improvement: • The school leader has established systems intended to identify the social and emotional developmental health needs of students to ensure that appropriate supports are provided for the majority of students. However, not all systems are interconnected to address the needs of all students, and do not include those who are passing their courses and exams. • School leaders reported that some strategies have been put in place to support students’ social and emotional developmental health; however, leaders could not readily identify specific operational behavioral strategies and actions, nor could interviewed students, staff, and parents. • The IIT found little evidence of a comprehensive and targeted PD plan to increase adult capacity in addressing students’ social and emotional developmental health needs. Supporting Evidence • The school communicates with parents through several modalities: principal meetings. Parent Association meetings, emails, automated phone calls, personal phone calls, postal mailings, parent-teacher conferences, case conferences, guidance meetings, parent newsletters, information nights, and events and Pupil Path, a web based program . • Documents reviewed evidenced mailed correspondence informing parents on the monthly professional learning sessions, what students will learn, updates regarding the new Global History and US History Common Core Standards and Assessments, the Geometry Common Core Regents Examination. Also, both progress reports and report cards are distributed six times per semester. Priority Needs: Systematic evaluation of identification systems to insure cohesion and consistency across all Small Learning Communities Solidify protocols for identifying students in need of support, particularly students who are on or almost on track to graduate, but may need social/emotional guidance intervention Implementation of a comprehensive PBIS plan for the school that includes Professional Development opportunities for staff and families on how to address students' social and emotional needs in class and at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in attendance and a 5% decrease in violent and disruptive incidents from 2017-18 data, as a result of the expansion of PBIS program as measured by Suspensions and Office of Hearings Online (SOHO) data and Period Attendance Reports (PAR). 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) • School will enhance its comprehensive PBIS program in all grades and Small Learning communities. Students ● PBIS tiered interventions will continue to address the needs of students including Behavioral Intervention Plans for Students with Disabilities SLC PBIS liaison September, 2018 through June, 2019 PBIS Team (Assistant Principals of Pupil Services and Security, Teachers, SLC Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Dean of Students) Monthly Team meetings with representatives from each Small Learning Community and Guidance will review identification systems and subsequent intervention plans to determine impact and next steps Quarterly celebrations will take place to reward positive behaviors and improved attendance Guidance staff and High Schools That Work will provide enhanced monthly professional development workshops on crisis intervention and how to foster a growth mind set throughout the school community in order to reduce disruptive incidents. Staff Parents September 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers, Guidance Counselors, SLC Coordinators. Partners Guidance staff will provide ongoing support to families on how to implement positive behavioral strategies in the home Parents will learn about their role and take part in the successful implementation of the program through meetings and celebrations. Students will continue to implement their peer initiated Ally and Ambassador programs as a way of teaching advocacy and engaging all students in improving the school environment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  In Small Learning Communities: All Students ● Teachers will collect data and conduct weekly case conferences to determine benchmarks, monitor, and evaluate supports and interventions for each high needs student. ● GCHS will continue to implement daily school day small group tutoring sessions through Small Learning Communities to foster student/staff relationships and provide individualized supports  BELA academy will implement PBIS for beginning, entering, emerging, and low intermediate ELLs. Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced/Expanding, and Proficient/ Commanding ELL, SIFE, and Overaged-under credited students September 2018-June 2019 PBIS team SLC teams September 2018-June 2019 BELLA SLC Team Assistant principal of Pupil Services Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging ELL students September 2018-June 2019 and YMCA CBO Director Students September 2018-June 2019  School will further its partnership with the local YMCA through the implementation of a school day advisory and enrichment program to address the individual needs of all students. GCHS will implement a comprehensive whole school communication system, Datacation, where parents, students, and staff will be able to view and communicate about all student data, including attendance, and guidance outreach in real time. This will result in increased transparency and more immediate support for students and families. Parents Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 PBIS team and Parent Coordinator AP/PPS/COSA/stlected students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Presentations at Parent Association Meetings each month by Assistant Principal of each Academic Department. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session will be paid to teachers for PBIS training 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Priority Focus funding as well as tax levy funding have been used to structure the school into small learning communities which are directed by both a coordinator and an AP. Each SLC meets daily to engage in inquiry, case conferencing and curriculum development. Professional development is provided every Monday. Consolidated Funding has been used for High Schools that Work support. Interborough Community Mental Health Center operated as a CBO through a NYS Department of Mental Health Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrators, counselors, teachers, parents and student leaders will examine the NYCDOE Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and Automate The Schools (ATS) attendance reports and compare last year’s suspension and attendance average for the fall semester to this school year’s average. The GCHS staff will evaluate the effectiveness of the monthly interventions and modify existing or create new interventions if necessary, based on an expected decrease of 3 % in suspensions and an increase of 1 % when compared to last year’s attendance for the months of September through January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SOHO and PAR Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Quality Review , dated April 27th 2015 , Strengths: The vast majority of teachers are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations aligned to school goals and opportunities are embedded to empower teachers to assume leadership roles that directly affect key decisions across the school. The use of common assessments and rubrics ensure that students receive actionable feedback and support teachers in adjusting curricula and instruction. 11/14- Developing for Tenet 4 – Teacher Practices and Decisions. Areas for Improvement  Data is inconsistently used by teachers to implement strategic practices responsive to the needs of all students.  Instructional scaffolding provided does not consistently support the learning needs of all students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Many classes do not challenge students to think critically or actively engage in their learning and most grouping is not tied to specific skills or strategies.  Most instruction addresses the needs of lower-achieving students and does not challenge or regularly engage all  other students. Feedback to students often does not relate to rubrics, specific skills, or writing strategies and other formative assessments, such as exit slips, are not regularly analyzed or used to guide and inform future instruction. Priority Areas of need: Teachers need to more consistently implement assessment strategies and analyze their outcomes to drive curricular and pedagogical decisions Teachers need to provided more consistent actionable feedback to students that is skill specific and aligned to rubrics Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August, 2019, the graduation rate will improve to 67.0%, as a result of teacher team collaboration that focuses on analyzing formative assessment outcomes to drive instructional adjustments, and providing students with specific, actionable feedback, supports and interventions to increase student passing rates and credit accumulation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). • Small learning community coordinators will plan inquiry and collaborative planning sessions for their SLCs. SLC coordinators Small Learning Community teachers will continue to participate in weekly professional learning opportunities in their SLCs, using the inquiry process to increase effective use of formative assessment strategies in order to plan for multiple entry points into lessons. Teachers Teachers Small learning community coordinators will plan and facilitate weekly Data Driven Instruction sessions to increase teacher ability to analyze data in order to make curricular and pedagogical adjustments Small learning community coordinators will plan and facilitate weekly data informed case conferences in their SLCs to increase ELL, SIFE and overaged-under credited students’ skill development. Teachers will receive professional development on how to develop more sophisticated formative assessment strategies that lead to timely and specific feedback for students. Teachers Teachers will receive professional development on how to engage students in authentic and effective self-assessment. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Borough Instructional Lead Principal, SLC Coordinators Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, SLC Coordinators 1 period weekly and one monthly extended time meeting September, 2018 through June 2019 Weekly sessions from September 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, SLC Coordinators Weekly sessions from September 2018 to June 2019 Each SLC will host a parent and community open house where the unique characteristics of the SLC are highlighted and students Parents and community members Once in Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  present their learning and actually train/demonstrate their learning to the community. Information sessions for 12 th grade students and their families will be conducted to prepare pupils for their senior year and post-secondary opportunities. Concentrated and coordinated adoption of all Cohort T students by all staff that leads to positive relationships and sustained motivation to attain a high school diploma will be implemented by administrators, staff, students and families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 12 th Grade Parents 12 th Grade Students October 2018 College Coaches meet three times in Fall 2018. -Mentors in Spring 2019. Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Students Principal, Assistant Principal of Pupil Services, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, SLC Coordinators, Parent Coordinators Principal/APs/teachers/ guidance counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Guidance sponsored parent meetings to introduce and describe social emotional programs and supports ( example: college night, PGC presentation, etc). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Priority Focus funding as well as tax levy funding have been used to structure the school into small learning communities which are directed by both a coordinator and an AP. Each SLC meets daily to engage in inquiry, case conferencing and curriculum development. Professional development is provided every Monday. High Schools that Work will provide on site professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of all students on track to graduate in June will have accumulated necessary credits for the Fall semester as measured by scholarship reports and guidance transcript reviews. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship reports, transcript reviews. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. November 13, 2014, the school received a rating of Developing for Tenet 2 – School Leader Practices and Decisions. Areas for improvement: • The school has no clear mission or vision related specifically to social and emotional health strategies or initiatives to promote and sustain rapid school improvement. Limited disaggregation of data hinders the ability of school leaders to make informed decisions about how to meet school goals, how the curriculum will prepare students for college and career readiness, or ways to identify literacy skill deficits and implement strategies that will move the school forward in a sustainable manner • School leaders need to better monitor and evaluate the use of resources and the impact they have on securing improvements in student academic and social achievements throughout the school year. • Although actionable feedback was provided verbally on a timely and consistent basis written feedback is not uniformly provided in a timely manner and sometimes takes up to a month before it is memorialized. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Actionable feedback often included multiple recommendations not specifically addressed in subsequent observations, thus hindering the implementation of targeted strategies. Priority needs: School administrators need to develop systems and structures to monitor impact of resource allocation School administrators need to develop systems and structures for consistent and comprehensive sharing of data within and across small learning communities School administrators need to develop systems and structures for monitoring the impact of professional development and teacher growth through systematic alignment of feedback and subsequent teacher observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, Algebra Common Core Regents Exam scores will increase by 3% for all first time test takers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Algebra Teachers will engage in weekly professional development based on needs as determined by classroom observations September, 2018-June, 2019 School Administration, Teachers, School Administrators will monitor professional development implementation through formal and informal observations Teachers, Administrators School administrators will discuss professional development needs based on observation trends on a weekly basis. Administrators School administrators will work collaboratively to ensure that feedback to students is relevant, timely, and focused on formative and summative assessments. Professional development will be provided in order to make the six week cycle of inquiry more productive for teachers. School administrators will track efficacy of professional development by monitoring student progress each marking period. School administrators will meet monthly with the A.P. Mathematics in order to review school data and plan how this data will be analyzed and acted upon within and across the instructional group. Administrators, teachers Administrators, SLC coordinators, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Use SLT and monthly Parent Association meetings to discuss classroom expectations and strategies used in lessons to engage students. Provide tutoring during lunch as well as Saturdays beginning in December, continuing through February and beginning again in May 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Priority Focus funding as well as tax levy funding have been used to structure the school into small learning communities which are directed by both a coordinator and an AP. The cabinet meets weekly to discuss systems, structures, data and PD implementation Professional development is provided every Monday. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In October 2018, Regents Item Analysis Data from June 2018 will be used in order to set goals for instructional improvement through out the Fall Semester. By February 2019, data from January Algebra Regents will be reviewed in order to continue to modify instruction with a goal of improving the passing rate for June 2019 from June 2018 by 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Algebra Regents item analysis reports and overall passing rates for January 2019 and June 2019 administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths 2014-2015 School Quality Review Report, dated April 27, 2015, School leaders and staff communicate high expectations and establish a culture for learning that offers ongoing feedback to students and families. The school communicates with parents through several modalities: principal meetings. Parent Association meetings, emails, automated phone calls, personal phone calls, postal mailings, parent-teacher conferences, case conferences, parent newsletters, pupil Path, information nights, and events. 11/14: the school has received a rating of Developing for Tenet 6 – Family and Community Engagement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Areas of need: ● School expectations are not clearly known to parents and school leaders and staff have not fully equipped families to help their children reach these expectations: Parents reported a lack of communication about their children’s specific learning needs that inhibits their ability to support student achievement. Additionally, although the school leaders and staff stated that all phone messages and key written communications are in the home languages of families, parents reported that this was not a consistent practice. School leaders reported a telephone option that allows for translation; however, none of the interviewed parents was aware of this option. Parents reported that teachers rarely contact them about academic concerns or specific student data. ● School leaders, staff, and parents reported a lack of routine, reciprocal communication with several ethnic groups within the school community. Although key staff members act as informal liaisons to assist parents with communication, and an incidental connection was established with one of the groups through a church leader, efforts to establish a consistent connection have not been implemented to engage all populations in the school community. . Priority of needs: The school needs to provide consistent parent training on how to utilize Datacations/Pupil Path The school needs to provide information to families in their home languages more consistently The school needs to provide subject based and guidance based information sessions The school needs to provide workshops for parents on how to best advocate for their children Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be increased real-time communication and participation between students, parents, and staff as a result of the implementation of Skedula/Pupil Path, a comprehensive whole school communication program, as measured by a combined 60% participation rate on PupilPath among all students and parents to increase parent participation in the educational process and participation in Parent Meetings and events. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ESL workshops will be facilitated on Saturdays with Grover Cleveland teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ESL teachers Parents/Guardians Workshops are ongoing from January 2019 through June, 2019 ● School sponsored activities and events will be held to celebrate student achievement for each SLC (SLC awards ceremonies, performances, CTE night, SLC parent meetings). Parents/Guardians /Community Members ● The DataCation system that includes Pupil Path-Parent/Student Portal will be implemented so parents and students can receive push notifications on attendance and grades. ● School will mail 6 progress reports to parents/guardians’ homes to inform them of their child’s academic progress Parents/Guardians Parents/Guardians Parents/Guardians/ Community Members ● Faculty will present relevant topics at monthly Parent Association meetings Parents/Guardians Staff and Students Datacation/Skedula will facilitate 6 workshops to train parents, staff, and students on how to navigate the Datacation systems Ensure that the school sends notifications/newsletters to parents in their home languages monthly Monthly events will be scheduled from January through June, 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 One monthly presentation from January through June, 2019 Parent CoordinAAAAAAAP'SLC coordinators, Assistant Principals, teachers, parents, Parent Coordinator Principal, Parent Coordinator, PBIS Team, Guidance Counselors School Aide, Program Chair, Teachers Teachers, administration, PTA, parents, Parent Coordinator, DataCation Trainer Principal, PBIS, Guidance Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Use Datacation/Skedula to post syllabi and assignments so that parents can assist students at home September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers Datacation will be used in conjunction with Global Connect to inform parents of unique opportunities to engage with their children such as the various GCHS’ awards ceremonies, Students and Parents September, 2018 to June, 2019 PBIS team, Parent Coordinator Carnegie Hall performances, and YMCA’s: • Thank You Mothers' Day celebration and • Parents as Partners celebration and YMCA SLC teams PGC (Peer Group Connection) Spring 2019 Teachers / Coaches will mentor students and mentee students. Translation services will be provided to parents at all workshops and meetings Parents September, 2018- June, 2019 Translation unit-parent volunteers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The YMCA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Food and beverage allocation for parental involvement • Parent Coordinator is funded through consolidated funds Skedula/Pupil Path is funded thorough consolidated funds PTA meetings, School Leadership team meetings and workshops are scheduled monthly Per session allocations will be used for Saturday workshops and for teacher led workshops in the evening. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services and parent coordinator will calculate the participation rate for Pupil Path and workshop attendance rates, compare these rates to the 55% target and last year’s rate, then adjust parent engagement strategies if necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Datacation, Skedula, and Pupil Path Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By August 2019, there will be a 3 % increase in the numbers of 1st, 2nd and 3rd year students who accumulate ten or more credits as a result of the implementation of extended learning time programs, as measured by the STARS graduation tracker and scholarship reports Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The school offers all ELT programs to every student. In addition, parents are informed of programs and individual student needs through Pupil Path, the six progress reports, monthly PA meetings, parent newsletter, and outreach by the guidance department, teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. In addition to the extended learning time built into the school day (GCHS is a split-session school and some students have a nine period day), the school offers several opportunities for students to develop academic skills necessary for receiving credits for graduation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41   The APEX program allows students to work at their own pace which alleviates the stresses often associated  with classroom learning. In addition, the school offers support to struggling students as they prepare to take Regents exams. Each SLC offers students extra tutoring during lunch hours so that students can receive individualized and timely support for both academic and social needs.  The school is supporting students with attendance issues through YMCA by providing tutoring, counseling,  SAT Prep sessions and cultural enrichment to keep them engaged in the school community. Finally, the school is committed to providing enrichment and support in helping student become college and career ready by partnering with Kaplan to raise SAT scores.  Other extended learning time programs include: • APEX Credit Accumulation opportunities • Saturday Academy and Extended Day for credit accumulation in PE • Regents preparation tutoring program • Kaplan SAT preparation program to promote college and career readiness All ELT programs are communicated to parents through newsletters sent home, backpacked letters as well as announcements at meetings and through Datacation. Guidance counselors review transcripts on an ongoing basis and provide outreach to families of students who would benefit from ELT offerings. Teachers engage in parent outreach to recommend ELT to students they believe would benefit from support or enrichment opportunities, Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. 1) Content area teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, YMCA program director and staff 2) The school has hired Kaplan K-12 Learning Services, a highly credited organization with a proven track record of raising SAT scores of students at all levels. Kaplan will run two separate SAT prep programs after-school, one for seniors and one for juniors. YMCA services are secured through a community partnership grant. YMCA offers extended learning time programs that include dance, cooking, fitness, and homework help. School programs are available before and after school, and Saturdays so that students can extend their learning while making time for jobs, family and other priorities. These include our STEM programs such as bridge building, science Olympiad, Envirathon, and STEP programs for engineering. The programs listed offer students several options to best meet their needs The school is also addressing the social/emotional concerns of students with attendance issues. Counseling for all social/emotional, academic and post-secondary and career readiness concerns are addressed through: a. Referrals made for families in need to cooperating CBOs for counseling and family therapy 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  b. Pupil Personnel Team meeting conducted for immediate interventions for at-risk students c. YMCA After School Program works with approximately 100 at-risk students to provide counseling, social work interventions, attendance incentives, clubs and trips of interest for poor , formerly incarcerated and homeless/temporary housing students 3)The faculty will establish more clubs and organizations based on student interest, that will include cultural, arts, CTE and athletic opportunities 4) School administrators, guidance counselors, and SLC coordinators will review scholarships rates using the STARS reports and the participation in Extended Learning Time programs through attendance sheets. The credit accumulation for participant will be reviewed at the beginning of each semester. Guidance counselors and SLC coordinators will review report cards after each marking period to further evaluate programs’ effectiveness. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 to June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Per session Consultant Allocation Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, transcripts will be reviewed for the targeted minimum of 5 credits for the fall semester as measured by the NYCSTARS report. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS - Transcript Data and Scholarship Reports. Graduation Tracker for Cohort T. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8th grade NYS ELA assessment proficiency level of a level 1 or 2, failing a marking period, or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self- referral When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day/after school Saturday Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole Class Double period ELA classes for Small group/ 1:1 level 1 and 2 and 9th graders • Additional Regents prep classes for 12th grade students who have not passed the ELA Regents • Regents prep tutoring (lunch & learn) and period 10 • Saturday mornings Regents prep • On-Line retake courses in ELA for senior and cohort students 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Mathematics 8th grade NYS Mathematics assessment proficiency level of a level 1 or 2, failing a marking period, or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self-referral Science 8th grade NYS ELA assessment proficiency level of a level 1 or 2, failing a marking period, or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self-referral 3 and 4 Semester CCR Algebra 1 Whole Class During the school day/after school Small group/ 1:1 classes for level 1 and 2 and beginning ELLs Saturday • Additional Regents prep classes for 12th grade students who have not passed the Math Regents • Regents prep tutoring (lunch & learn) and period 10 • Saturday mornings Regents prep • On-Line retake courses in Math for senior and cohort students 3 semester Living Environment course for Beginning ELLs Additional Regents prep classes for 12th grade students who have not passed the Science Regents • Regents prep tutoring (lunch & learn) and period 10 • Saturday mornings Regents prep Whole Class Small group/ 1:1 During the school day/after school Saturday 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Social Studies 8th grade NYS ELA assessment proficiency level of a level 1 or 2, failing a marking period, or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self-referral At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Absent for more than five consecutive days or 20 cumulative , teacher referral, parent or self-referral • On-Line retake courses in Science for senior and cohort student Additional Regents prep classes for 12th Whole Class Small group/ 1:1 During the school day/after school grade students who have not passed the Saturday Social Studies Regents exams • Regents prep tutoring (lunch & learn) and period 10 • Saturday mornings Regents Whole Class Small group/ 1:1 Small group/ 1:1 During the school day During the school day/after school Saturday 19 Prep • On-Line retake courses in Social Studies for senior and cohort students Counseling for all social/emotional, academic and :1 and small group During the school day/after school Saturday 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  referrals made for families in need to cooperating CBOs for counseling and family therapy • Pupil Personnel Team meeting conducted for immediate interventions for at-risk students • YMCA After School Program works with 100 at-risk students to provide counseling, social work interventions, attendance incentives, clubs and trips of interest for poor attenders, formerly incarcerated and homeless/temporary housing students 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 108 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will receive metro card, free lunch, school supplies, school bag, tutoring services and counseling services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Assistant Principals and SLC coordinator provides PD and professional information on a weekly basis. Teachers also receive PD from the Queens North Borough Field Support Office, both at school and at a central location. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are consulted about school decisions at SLC meetings. Teachers have impact on instructional decisions through the SLC and SLT. Teachers are also active members of the MOSL team which decided accountability measures for teachers. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 734,501.00 0 313821 0 43,912.00 0 9,495,906.00 X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 13-40 13-40 13-40 13-40 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Grover Cleveland High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Grover Cleveland High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Grover Cleveland High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Grover Cleveland Title III instructional program is comprised of an after-school weekday program and a Saturday Academy. The goal of our program is to encourage, support, collaborate and inspire our ENL/Bilingual/Newcomer students to strive for academic success and language proficiency. To best support all our ENL students in their academic, college and career goals and objectives we designed our supplemental, Title III instructional program, to be comprised of an after-school weekday program and a Saturday Academy. The instructional programs, held after student's regular school day only, will service ENLS in grades 9, 10, 11 and 12: entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding on the NYSESLAT as well as our entitled commanding students. The supplemental instruction supports and prepares our English Language Learners for the rigor of Regents Examinations, NYSESLAT, Advanced Placement classes and exams, college essays and the challenges of higher education/workforce. The weekday After-School Instructional Intervention Program will begin in October 2018 and will end in June 2019. The program will consist of small group instruction in Math, Science, Social Studies, Native Language and ENL: entering, emerging, transitioning; expanding and commanding ENL/ELA Comprehensive Regents Preparation. All instruction will be aligned to CCLS, NYS Bilingual standards. Students will also be supported with homework and make-up work opportunities throughout the semesters. Classroom libraries, glossaries and individual student white boards will support instruction: the classroom libraries will provide native language support in reading to effect change in second language acquisition; individual student white boards will be utilized as a communicative assessment tool to facilitate questioning and discussion. The Title III program is conducted after-school and on Saturdays in the spring semester. The bilingual and ENL small group instruction is taught by certified content/ENL/ bilingual teachers. There are a total of eleven teachers that will be collaborating in the after-school program and eleven in our Saturday academy. Our immigrant students will have access to all available resources: home language glossaries/dictionaries, laptops, access to Achieve 3000 online reading program, Castle Learning web-based instructional program, classroom libraries, manipulatives, calculators, and SMART technology. Our extra-curricular activities and excursions, taking place throughout the school year, will provide real life experiences to augment instruction and immerse our students in American, heritage/history and civics. ENL students will be provided with the opportunity to participate in our CFES (College for Every Student) program: (Provided by other funding sources as available). This program gives students the support they need in preparation for the challenging and extensive navigation of the college application process. The core practices will include: 1. Pathways to College and Career 2. Mentoring 3. Leadership through Service 4. Campus visits 5. Application and College entrance essay support. Two ENL certified teachers, in collaboration with a CFES specialist and liaison, will spearhead program and will conduct meetings after-school. Instructional Plan: Weekday After-School Fall semester: In the fall after school, the small group instructional program is available to our entire ENL population in grades 9-12. Small group instruction sessions will be comprised of approximately 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information fifteen students or less. The program will begin in October and will end in January. Small group instruction will take place three days a week: Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. The one-hour small group instruction sessions are held during periods 9, or 10. The one-hour, small group, instruction sessions are held as follows: 9th period instruction begins at 2:35 p.m., 10th period instructional begins at 3:30 p.m. The following disciplines are represented: ENL Math: Ms. Hanna; Bilingual Math: Mr. Pagan; Social Studies: Ms. Crespo; Science: ENL/Bilingual Mr. Campo, Dr. El Tabakh; Native Language (Spanish): Ms. Gil, Mr. Martiz, Mr. Lopez, Mr. Valentin; ENL Expanding: Ms. Levy, Ms. Muller, and Transitioning: Ms. Lopez; Entering/Emerging: Ms. Kim. The interdisciplinary sessions are of one-hour duration a week. The fall program has ten weeks of duration. All teachers are certified in their instructional content area, ENL/ native language. Instruction will be in alignment with the Common Core, NYC, NYS performance standards. Instruction will be in accordance with our LAP policy, the ENL instruction is delivered through differentiated, rigorous literacy strategies and scaffolds to support content area instruction. The on-line differentiated reading program, Achieve 3000 (Reading Program), supports ENL instruction as well. Instructional Plan: After-School and Saturday Academy Spring semester: In the Spring After-School, the small group instructional program is available to our entire ENL population in grades 9-12. Small group instruction sessions will be comprised of approximately fifteen students or less. All Title III teachers are certified ENL/Bilingual/content teachers. Small group instruction is held according to ENL language proficiency levels. The program will begin in February and end in June. Instruction will take place once a week, every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, during periods 9, or 10. The one-hour small group instruction sessions are held as follows: 9th period instruction begins at 2:35 p.m., 10th period instruction begins 3:30 p.m. Since there are eleven teachers in the program, there will be supervision in place overseeing the Title III Program. The Spring After-School has eleven teachers. The following disciplines are represented: ENL Math: Ms. Hanna, Bilingual Math: Mr. Pagan; Social Studies: Ms. Crespo; Science: ENL/Bilingual Mr. Campo, Dr. El Tabakh; Native Language (Spanish): Ms. Gil, Mr. Martiz, Mr. Lopez, Mr. Valentin; ENL Expanding: Ms. Levy, Ms. Muller, Transitioning: Ms. Lopez, Entering/Emerging Ms. Kim. Sessions will be one-hour session per week for ten weeks during the after- school spring program. All teachers are certified in their instructional content area, ENL and native language. Instruction will be in alignment with the Common Core, NYC, NYS performance standards. Instruction will be in accordance with our LAP policy, the ENL instruction is delivered through differentiated, rigorous literacy strategies and scaffolds to support content area instruction. The on-line differentiated reading program, Achieve 3000 (Reading Program), supports ENL instruction as well. The Saturday Academy Spring semester will consist of eleven teachers: ENL and content certified teachers, will conduct small group instruction for a period of ten Saturdays, for a period of three hours, during the spring semester. ENL Science: Dr. El Tabakh, Bilingual Math: Mr. Pagan; Social Studies: Ms. Crespo; Science: ENL/Bilingual Ms. Tavarez; Native Language (Spanish): Mr. Martiz, Mr. Lopez, Mr. Valentin; ENL Expanding: Ms. Levy, Ms. Muller, Transitioning: Ms. Lopez, Entering/Emerging: Ms. Kim. Instructional sessions will be three hours in duration and will take place from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. The Saturday Academy will begin in March and it will end in June before Regents week. Small group instruction will be comprised of approximately fifteen students or less. Instruction will be in accordance with our LAP policy, Common Core performance standards and school goals and objectives. The Saturday Academy will also comprise of ENL instruction for parents (See Parental involvement section). Collations will be available during the Saturday sessions to support parental involvement. Other supplemental funds we will work with the Repertorio Español (Spanish Repertory Theatre). The program will provide NLA instruction through the theatre arts. A professional completes an in-house residency at our school and works with an NLA class on play 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information writing, literature analysis and acting; to support instruction, we will purchase a number of dictionaries and word-to-word glossaries in accordance with the language diversity of our school. Other supplementary materials will be provided for English, Native Language Arts, Science, Social Studies and Math instruction for ELLs. General instructional supplies such as chart paper, markers, ink, supplemental books to enhance libraries, and literature related videos will also be purchased. ENL students in art classes will be supported in order to foster a cross-cultural arts awareness and enrichment. In coordination with other sources, our ENL/ Bilingual students will be provided with extra-curricular opportunities to explore diversity in music and the arts. A bilingual supervisor will support the Title III Saturday Academy Program. Parental notifications and permission letters are sent home requiring a signature; also invitations and pertinent literature is distributed during parent teacher conferences in parents preferred language; records are maintained throughout the year. We record student and parental attendance on specific sign- in sheets for each instructional session. All copies of attendance records are maintained in the ENL office. Providing Students with Supplemental guidance: ENL students/SIFE/Long-Term /ENLs need social-emotional supports in place in order to prepare them to attain the College and career readiness benchmark goals: Common Core Learning Standards Academic and Personal Behaviors Academic Programming College & Career Access Through an ENL and Guidance department collaboration, we will be conducting one-hour small group advisories once a month after school. These sessions are supplementary to the regular guidance sessions; they take place after school, Mondays; they are collaborative and focus on assisting students, not accustomed to a structured educational system, in all aspects of their education; the focus is maintained on a providing a multicultural, nurturing and secure environment. Sessions will begin in November 2018 and end in June 2019. This team will be comprised of: one CFES: College for Every Student (CFES leadership and mentoring program) liaison, Ms. O’Hara , one bilingual/ENL counselor, Ms. Irace, one native language/bilingual content teacher, Mr. Martiz and Ms. Kim, ENL/SIFE liaison teacher. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development is consistent and ongoing. ENL, Bilingual and Native Language teachers will receive ongoing professional development that will provide them with opportunities to develop and share ideas in order to enhance our current curricula and overall practice. Professional Development will be conducted by ENL Assistant Principal: Ms. Dominguez, ELA Assistant Principal: Dr. Robertson, in collaboration with, ENL licensed Coordinator: Ms. Levy, NLA licensed Testing Coordinator: Mr. Martiz. Teacher turnkey presenters for outside professional development in varied areas and providing teacher instructional support. Teachers will also participate in outside professional development to address areas need to support our ENL population. In-house, Title III teachers will receive ongoing professional development through a number of sources: BELA Academy common 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Part C: Professional Development planning time three times a week; bi-weekly after school Monday teacher meetings and instructional team meetings; monthly instructional team meetings, faculty conferences and College Board workshops. Funded by Title III , ENL/ bilingual content area teachers, native language teachers will be provided with nine professional development meetings, one hour duration, in the following areas: September: ENL co-teaching model best practices , IO Classroom, Danielson Framework for Teaching Components: Focus on Questioning, Engagement and Assessment. October: Castle Learning web-based instructional program: online review of courses in all content areas. Research Based Practices for Teaching Reading Comprehension for English Language Learners with a Focus on Literacy; Achieve 3000 Implementation and Goal Setting: November: Danielson Framework for Teaching Components: Focus on Questioning, Engagement and Assessment. December: Data and IO Classroom system training for ENL parents, ELA Regents interdisciplinary collaborative in preparation for exam: January: Analyze and Evaluate Argumentative Common Core Units; Collaborative development and design of the Common Core Expository Units. February: Achieve 3000 data analysis and spring goal implementations. March: Questioning and Assessment Techniques for the ENL classroom. April: Development of assessments, rubrics and protocols for year ending ENL units: May: Data analysis and inquiry in preparation for June Regents: June: Professional Goal reflections and next steps to inform instruction. Title III will fund these professional development topics that will be conducted by ENL Assistant Principal; Achieve 3000 developers; ENL Coordinator and ENL Testing Coordinator. Funded by Title III we will hold two two-hour study group/ inquiry group meetings. The meetings will take place between the months of November- May. Meetings will be held in alternate weekdays: Tuesday - Wednesday. Focus: Inquiry work using the Tuning and Data Mining protocol guidelines: ENL/Bilingual Content Area teachers will meet to analyze student work, identify trends, develop remediation strategies and appropriate outreach to struggling students; teacher teams will also make parental outreach. 2) NYSESLAT review, protocols and procedures training sessions. 3) Attendance Intervention: Identify students with a low attendance rate; teachers will form collaborative teams for outreach and communication. 4) NYS Seal of Bi-literacy implementation team. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops and teacher trainers will be paid per session rates. Professional development is key to teacher growth, which directly impacts student progress. Teachers working the Title III program will receive on going professional development through our BELA Academy: small, interdisciplinary groups that meet three times a week. Our professional development will inform instruction to prepare students for the academic rigor of the Comprehensive State exams and to support their College and Career readiness. We will focus on ENL/bilingual literacy strategies for content areas, interactive lesson and technology in the ENL class and native language support. We maintain agendas and meeting specific attendance sign-in sheets for each professional development session. All copies of attendance records are maintained in the ENL office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Saturday Academy/ Spring Semester: Parents are key to our student’s success. Parent involvement is crucial. It is important to provide them with not only a welcoming and friendly school experience but also with one that provides educational opportunities. Funded by Title III, we will be conducting Saturday classes for parents. Ten three-hour parent ENL instructional classes from 9:00a.m.-12:00 p.m. The instruction will be provided by a certified ENL teacher: Ms. O’Hara. The instruction is differentiated, and culturally sensitive. A bilingual supervisor is available to provide native language support to Spanish speakers and arrange oral translations for low incidence languages as needed. The program comprises of multilingual teachers: Spanish: Mr. Martiz, Arabic: Dr. El Tabakh, Polish: Ms. Levy, Italian: Ms. Dominguez, Korean: Ms. Kim, and Chinese: Ms. Zheng. Parents will be notified through parent letters, phone calls, IO Classroom and during our fall/ spring Parent Teacher Conferences. Collations will be available. Translations and supervision will be in place at all parent functions. MONTHLY PARENT WORKSHOPS: There will be approximately ten-parent workshops/meeting for the school year from September to May. In collaboration with our parent coordinator, SAPIS liaison, guidance department, Assistant Principals, and out-side presenters, will facilitate parent workshops. The parent meetings will be one hour in duration. Topics: September: PBIS, Orientation for ENLs including program selection, discipline code, registration process, entitlement information, video viewing; Parent Conference: Meet the Principal Night: school culture, protocols, school goals and objectives, content area information, guidance protocols, credits and graduation requirements, all services available. October: Parent-Child Communication skills; November: ENL Parent meeting with focus on ENL/ Bilingual 9th graders, Know your Rights (Immigrant issues) December: How to prepare for the college process, Family Assessment Program; January: Domestic Violence, Bullying and Cyber bullying; February: Gender and Identity. March: Stress, anxiety and depression: Mental Health Anxiety in Teens; April: Building your child’s self-confidence; May: PTC, Mental Health. June: Graduation procedures. In collaboration with our parent coordinator, SAPIS liaison, guidance department, Assistant Principals, and out-side presenters, will facilitate parent workshops. The parent meetings will be one hour in duration. Translation services are utilized for parent meetings and parent teacher conferences using DOE translators and purchased technology. For low incidence languages, at meetings, oral translators are provided as needed. The progress reports and other communication are sent in the parents’ preferred language. Parents and students are afforded six progress and grade reports a year. Parent outreach and communication is ongoing throughout the year. Parents are sent invitations via letters, through our phone master service, IO Classroom and text. Communication is in the parents preferred language. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend meetings throughout the year. All Title III record keeping is maintained in the ENL office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 66 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Grover Cleveland High School Borough Queens School Number 485 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Vittor Denise Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Janine Curiale, Krystyna Levy Teacher/Subject Area Alexandra Gil Teacher/Subject Area Felix Pagan Related-Service Provider Donna Williams Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Regina Domínguez Coach N/A School Counselor Chirley Irace Parent Fatima Abu-Ghazaleh Parent Coordinator Lydia Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Suzanne Garcia, A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 10 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 6 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1802 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 Total number of ELLs 328 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.20%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): SP If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 6 10 11 12 6 3 1 0 0 0 0 6 6 3 1 Tot # 16 0 0 0 0 0 16 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to evaluate the early literacy skills of our ENL’s include teacher created assessments, Achieve 3000 pretests and benchmark assessments, and the NYC Performance Exam in ELA. Data shows 72% of our ENL population are newcomer ENL’s, many of whom have entered the country as secondary students. Data from the assessments show that our ENL students need an intensive language approach throughout their day, across all content areas. In addition, academic vocabulary and scaffolding in every lesson is of the utmost importance, in order to foster understanding of content and the expression of content learned. See data tables for exact numbers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL programs through various measures including the number of ENL students who : pass classes (as indicated by scholarship reports each marking period), pass NYS regents exams (specifically the ELA and Math Regents as measured by AYP), pass NYC Performance exams, and pass or improved performance on the NYSESLAT exam. Ultimately, we evaluate the success of our ENL program through the number of ENL students graduating in 4, 5 or 6 years. Our 4 year graduation rate for ENL students in Cohort Q is 32%, whereas last year’s graduation rate for ENL students in Cohort P was 27%. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Performance levels on the NYSESLAT show that although approximately 72% of our population are newcomers, only 30% tested at the Entering level and 18% tested at the Emerging level, 11% tested at the Transitioning level. This totals 59% of the population. Students are gaining English literacy skills and academic language acquisition at a rate of more than one year per year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At Grover Clevel;and we maintain high standards and practices to provide our ELL population with a academicaly rich, cuturally sensitive and respectful learning environment. Our school leadership is respectful and mindful of the challenges facing our ENLs and makes programming and sturucture decisions with this in mind. Our school sturucture is now comprised of small learning communities with teacher teams that meet on a weekly basis for : inquiry process, case conferencing: socio-emotional focus, assessment, academic goals , professional development and AIS : best practices and tutoring . The academies are as follows: • New 2015-16 BELA ACADEMY(( Bridge to English Language Acquisition) for ENL students at the : entering, emerging, transitioning levels of language progression • NINTH GRADE ACADEMY (NGA) • STEM • ALLIED HEATH • COMMUNICATION ARTS • BUSINESS AND HOSPITALITY 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  In the academies students are not programed in blocks but move across blocks based on educational needs. In the BELA academy students are placed by language proficiency levels in the Free Standing ENL classes. ESL /Bilingual content classes are heterogeneously placed based on academic and graduation needs. The Ninth Grade Academy (NGA )is contained in an are of the building to support the Freshman needs of structure, discipline and order. Students in the expanding, commanding levels of progression may be found in the other academies based on student choice and programming availability. Bilingual (Spanish) students, in addition to ESL services, are provided with a native language arts class to support their academic language development. Each academy has a dedicated counselor that meets in collboration with teacher teams. Our ELL students are also provided with tutoring opportunities within the SLC twice a week in addition to the after-school and Saturday ELL tutoring program in all contentnt areas. ESL/ Bilingual teachers work together with the content teachers to build culturally sensite and nurturing learning environments for our ENL students. In accordance with the new CR-Part 154 implementation our ENL students receive stand alone and integrated ESL instruction at all levels of language progression. Our commnding students are also scheduled to receive ESL instruction to support their transition. b. TBE program. If applicable. See above c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL students receive beyond the mandated ENL services. At the entering/emerging level we provide our students with an additonal 180 minutes of instruction. At the transitioning level we provide an additional 120 minutes. At the commanding level we provide an additional 60 minutes a weeek. _____________________________________________________________________ ENL ENTERING /EMERGING STUDENTS FREE STANDING INTEGRATED ENL 48 MINUTE CLASSES 48 MINUTES 480 MINUTES WEEKLY 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAl: 720 MINUTES TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL ENTERING/EMERGING INTEGRATED 48 MINUTE CLASSES 48 MINUTES 480 MINUTES WEEKLY 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 720 MINUTES WEEKLY NATIVE LANGUAGE 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENL TRANSITIONING STUDENTS FREE STANDING INTEGRATED ENL 48 MINUTE CLASSES 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAl: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL ENTERING/EMERGING INTEGRATED 48 MINUTE CLASSES 48 MINUTES 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  240 MINUTES WEEKLY 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY NATIVE LANGUAGE 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENL EXPANDING STUDENTS FREE STANDING INTEGRATED ENL N/A 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENGLISH CLASS 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL INTEGRATED ENL N/A 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENGLISH CLASS 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY NATIVE LANGUAGE 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES EEKLY TOTAL : 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENL COMMANDING G STUDENTS FREE STANDING INTEGRATED ENL N/A 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENGLISH CLASS 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL INTEGRATED ENL N/A 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ENGLISH CLASS 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL: 480 MINUTES WEEKLY NATIVE LANGUAGE 48 MINUTES 240 MINUTES WEEKLY TOTAL : 240 MINUTES WEEKLY ELA Regents Additional Prep class: An additional Regents prep class (L10) is offered to those ELLS in the country for more than one year and that are at the intermediate to advanced levels of language proficiency in the NYSESLAT, are enrolled in intermediate to advanced ESL classes, and /or are scheduled to take the ELA Regents in January/June. Cohort students are also supported with this additional class. The advanced level students also take a literature class from the English Department that provides Common Core Regents support as well. Students preparing for the Regents are also offered support through the ESL Title III After-school/Saturday Program. All classes infuse Common Core goals and objectives. The integrated classes follow 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  the DOE Common Core Curricula. Long–Term ELLs/SIFE- are targeted through classes that provide support through our on-line reading program, Achieve 3000: ESL/ Social Studies content instruction, ESL/Science content instruction. Building academic language through content is extremely important for our long-term ELLS. Our bilingual LTE are also supported through NLA classes that build academic language as well. Students are provided with weekly classroom sessions of the Achieve 3000 reading program in addition to providing specific tutoring sessions around our reading initiative and Achieve 3000. This is made possible through a number of funding sources. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In Math , the ESL instruction is delivered using the Frayer Model, vocabulary building, numeracy related word walls and students are provided with tutoring opportunities during the day as well as after school. Common Core Algebra 1 courses for Spanish Bilingual and ESL use the Engage New York and Carnegie Learning Program. The Frayer Models are used as visual organizers to extend vocabulary in the ESL and Spanish Bilingual mathematics classes. There are two licensed Spanish Bilingual Mathematics teachers who deliver mathematics instruction in Spanish and English. Students are programmed for mathematics based on their mathematics levels, not their ESL level. Licensed Day High School mathematics teachers deliver ESL mathematics lessons using the Frayer Model and other strategies. In the ninth grade, since 2014, students have been immersed in the Common Core Curricula for Math in preparation for the new Common Core Algebra 1 Regents. The ninth grade teachers utilize the CCSS curricula to deliver highly conceptualized, challenging instruction using technology, and all collaborate in the inquiry process through their department meeting and or SLC common planning period. The science department offers Regents Earth Science and Regents Living Environment courses in bilingual (Spanish) and ESL models. Ninth Grade ESL Living Environment classes are divided into two groups—beginner and intermediate students. Earth Science classes for ENL students are divided, when possible, into appropriate groupings. The teacher always implements ESL methodology. Students are also offered electives in Geohazards and Ecology in an integrated setting. Ninth Grade bilingual students are taught Living Environment in Spanish/English as are the tenth grade Earth Science students. ESL Science classes are taught entirely in English with ESL methodology. To assist ESL students with the rigor of Science academic vocabulary words are defined and translated from their own language to English. Differentiation, vocabulary activities and web organizers are used to deliver the content. Each student is provided with enough time to read, make observations, and analyze a particular task or reading. They are asked to find pertinent evidence, make inferences and draw conclusions based on the given facts or investigation. Laboratory is given once a week in relation to the current unit/topic that is being discussed. Additional activities are added to the lab to compensate and to reinforce the content. In all Science classes, the students are given literacy skill building activities that also reinforce content within each daily lesson. Students are intentionally paired and grouped to facilitate content learning and language practice and acquisition. Students receive tutoring during the school day, through our lunch and learn program on Tuesdays and Thursdays. As a support , through Title III and other grant funding, students are provided with afterschool tutoring, as well as a Saturday academy program from 9am to 12pm. In our Transitional Bilingual Science classes the native language support is always present and based on the students' ESL proficiency levels. Methodologies include: Use of graphic organizers to introduce and assess concepts that encourage meaningful learning (require minimal language). Examples: Venn diagrams, flow charts and concept maps, Use of graphs, charts, diagrams, pictures. Visual representation of concepts, use of science videos to introduce and review concepts, introduction of concepts in their native language and later give them the same concepts in English; build new vocabulary in their second language through different activities like: word search, complete sentences looking at the word and picture; 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  lesson summaries using the second language (at the end of the lesson with short sentences at the beginning of the year to paragraphs at the end of the semester); Homework with short paragraphs in the second language to understand, acquire and underline words that are difficult to understand (use of dictionary, glossaries). Closed Caption in videos to correlate written and spoken English. Laboratory activities are done using both English and translated versions. Students are encouraged to define vocabulary and make inferences in order to understand concepts in both languages. Some activities are done in Spanish and some in English. Students are able to select the native language and/or English versions of each course exam including the regents exams. All social studies classes follow NYS mandated course standards and the materials presented align with the scope and sequence provided by the state and the Common Core Standards. We incorporate both the English and Spanish language into the classroom lesson. Reading activities are also presented in both languages. Glossaries are used as well as photographs, atlases, art work, films and tactile objects. Textbooks are also available in Spanish and English versions. We continue to teach the Social Studies content infusing ESL methodology. A curriculum has been developed with an emphasis on vocabulary and the infusion of various different learning styles into the lesson. A resource library has also been placed in ESL classrooms to assist students further with their understanding of the curriculum Native language classes incorporate literacy strategies in line with Common Core standards and following Blooms Taxonomy/Hess Depth of Knowledge. Our native language classes use the following text books: Tesoro Literario, Nuestro Mundo, Tu Mundo, Encuentros Maravillosos, Abriendo Puertas, Parabienes, A.P. Spanish Language: Triángulo Aprobado, A.P. Literature: Rlexiones: Introucci ón a la Literatura Hispanica. The native classes complete Common Core non-fiction essays using authentic text. The students are required to complete both an expository and a persuasive essay on a Common Core non-fiction topic. TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL EDUCATION PROGRAM Bilingual instruction is offered in content areas to students in a situation where there are 20 or more students in the same grade who speak the same language. It consists of Native Language Arts, Social Studies, Science and Math. We offer a full Spanish bilingual program. There are ELL students mainstreamed in Physical Education, Art, Music, Technology and other subjects. Students not in the Bilingual Spanish program receive content area instruction using ESL and literacy strategies and methodology. Currently we have the following classes in the bilingual program: 6 Social Studies, 5 Math and 4 Science. In the ESL program we have the following: 7 Social Studies, 6 Math, and 6 Science. We continue to encourage inter-visitation between ESL and content area teachers to share best practices. Our pacing calendars and curriculam maps are updated to reflect Common Core goals and objectives and , new stadard based strategies. For students in a bilingual program, native language courses are offered to include Advanced Placement Language and Literature. Freestanding ENL students are also afforded the opportunity to learn a foreign language : Spanish, Italian. There is close attention to consistently infusing academic language in all ESL and content area classes. The goals of the Transitional Bilingual Programs are: Content Area • Attaining English language proficiency within three years • Providing grade- level academic work in the student’s native language so that the student maintains academic progress while developing English proficiency • Providing instruction in two languages: the native language and English: o Beginner Level, classes follow the format of 60% in Native Language and 40% in English o In the Intermediate Level, classes follow the format of 50% in Native Language and 50% in English o In the Advanced Level, classes follow the format of 25% in Native Language and 75% in English The native language will go from: Highly conceptual and linguistically demanding with a focus on challenging work and high production. Activities should: • Develop cognition • Develop higher order thinking skills • Introduce new concepts through methods such as inquiry and problem solving • Introduce students to processing concepts/skills I n t r o d u c t i o n a n d 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  d e v e l o p m e n t o f a c a d e m i c d i s c o u r s e , s u c h a s h y p o t h e s i z i n g , e v a l u a t i n g , i n f e r r i n g , g e n e r a l i z i n g , p r e d i c t i n g a n d c l a s s i f y i n g . L a n g u a g e g l o s s a r i e s D e v e l o p m e n t o f c o n c e p t s A s s e s s m e n t o f c o n c e p t u a l u n d e r s t a n d i n g Transitioning to: English Language Student tasks that encourage thinking, reading, speaking and writing L o w - d e m a n d l i n g u i s t i c t a s k s a n d w o r k p r o d u c t i o n . A c t i v i t i e s s h o u l d i n c l u d e : • Reviews • Linguistic summaries • Highly contextualized concepts Transitioning to: English Language H i g h l y c o n t e x t u a l i z e d s t u d e n t t a s k s t h a t e n c o u r a g e t h i n k i n g , r e a d i n g , s p e a k i n g a n d w r i t i n g U s i n g a c a d e m i c d i s c o u r s e i n r e v i e w s U s i n g l a n g u a g e c o n c e p t g l o s s a r i e s w i t h : • Key terms • Vocabulary • Functions Students receive native language support through our NLA classes. The NLA classes support content by working collaboratively with content and ESL teachers in order to inform the instruction by way of BIG themes accross contents, brick and mortar words across content, content embeded objectives in the native language. Also, our NLA students utilize the Achieve 3000 reading program in the native language. Our Native Language program not only prepares students for the Spanish LOTE Spanish but also offers our students Advanced Placement classes: Advance Placement Language, Advanced Placement Literature. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  ENL students in bilingual programs are assessed and placed in level appropriate native language classes. Throughout the year they are evaluated using our native language class formative assessments, Achieve 3000 bench mark and ending assessments , the NYC ELE (Examen de Lectura En Español ) were applicable based on LOTE administration criteria. Students are also programmed to follow a language sequence that culminates in the LOTE exam. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our long term ENL and SIFE students receive differentiated instruction by consistently infusing a variety of lieracy skills and strategies in the ENL class as well as the content class. Also, these students are suppported through our highly differentiated on-line reading program Achieve 3000. This program is administered during the regular day class , after-school, during the Saturday Academy program and always availble to students from home. Our Integrated ENL classes afford our students both an English and an ESL teacher ; this provides more opportunities to differentiate insrtuction for all. Our bilingual LTE/SIFE students are also supported through NLA classes that build academic language and Achieve 3000 in the native language as well. ELA Regents Additional Prep class: An additional Regents prep class (L10) is offered to those ELNL students in the country for more than one year and that are at the intermediate to advanced levels of language proficiency in the NYSESLAT, are enrolled in intermediate to advanced ESL classes, and /or are scheduled to take the ELA Regents in January/June. Cohort students are also supported with this additional class. The expanding and commanding level students also take a literature class from the English Department to provide Regents support as well . Students preparing for the Regents are also offered support through the our ENL Title III After-school/Saturday Program . All classes infuse Common Core goals and objectives and are most currently utilizing the new DOE CCLS curriculum . ELLs with Special Needs - Our ENL students are collaboratively supported by the ESL and Instructional Support department. They are provided with all mandated services based on each student’s IEP. For long term ELLs with disabilities and who need an extension of services the following instructional support is provided: modified curriculum, alternate placement bilingual paraprofessionals (dependent on student’s IEP), infusion of ESL methodology in content areas, visuals, SMART technology interactive lessons. These students are also provided with tutoring opportunities during and after the school day. These students, IEP permitting, are also registered in our on line reading program, Achieve 3000. This program provides students with highly differentiated text, assessments and exercises to support academic language. ELL-SWDs receive instruction as follows: •ESL methodology in content area classes. •Visual/pictorial dictionaries as reference and aides. •Bilingual dictionaries as reference and aides. •Spell checkers/calculators •Translation as needed by bilingual teacher(s), paraprofessional and/or student(s). •Vocabulary graphic organizers. •As appropriate, writing or retelling in native language with translation. •Syllabication of key words and vocabulary. •Differentiated instruction (visuals, auditory and hands-on). •Films with subtitles in native language. •Low level/high interest literature and informative text. •Grade level of texts is subject to and individualized by students’ reading level derived from the following sources: student’s IEP, teacher recommendation, assessments and soft data. There is differentiation of reading materials (texts, fiction and 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  informational [non- fiction]), based on students’ instructional reading level. The four language components of speaking, listening, reading and writing are included in all lessons. In order to meet the needs of ELLsSWDs within the least restrictive environment, the ISS department ensures: •Differentiation of reading materials/texts that are based on students’ instructional reading levels. See above descriptions. •IEPs are consistently reviewed and mandated services are provided by the appropriate school staff. •Students with the IEP recommendation of related services only or Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) and whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction participate in bilingual classes with the appropriate service in the native language. I.e. counseling with a Spanish speaking counselor. Bilingual SETSS class with a Spanish/English speaking special educator. •Students who are bilingual and have the IEP recommendation of Integrated Co-teaching (ICT) or Special class in a community district high school are assigned to an alternate placement bilingual (Student’s native language/English) paraprofessional in lieu of bilingual special classes or bilingual integrated co-teaching classes as we, as a school, have a small number of students 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWDs are placed in classes based on their IEP and language needs. In order to ensure that ELL-SWDs are apporpriately placed, there is consistent collaboration between the ESL and Instructional Support department. The Assistant Principals of both departments meet to discuss programming decisions based on IEP documentation . These students are included into ENL classes based on their language proficiency levels and their IEP information. In compliance with the IEP and/or NYSESLAT progressions these students are provided with all the required mandated instructional minutes of English as well as the native languge minutes for bilingual students. Teachers of ENLs with SWDs differentiate instruction and infuse literacy/ESL methodology to assess and address the student’s language needs. These students are provided with scaffolding and differentiated materials: graphic organizers, leveled text, diffrentiated teacher made worksheets, Frayer model, Achieve 3000. These students are in classes where the teachers utilize SMART technology as a mode of interactive instruction, on-line text exercises and students have weekly access to portable computer labs in order to work on the highly differentiated Achieve 3000 reading program. Emerging to Intermediate students are part of of our BELA academy and are afforded all tutoring and academy resoursces on a consistent basis. Title III tutoring and week day tutoring is available for all. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with IEPs are programmed according to their recommended programs and/or services as per their most recent IEP. Electives, based on students’ small learning community affiliation and Physical Education, for most students, except those in Adaptive Physical Education, are within general education. Our students are programmed in each of our SLCs and are also provided with all mandated as per their IEP. In our new BELA academy, ENL academy, these students will be part of our case conferencing, inquiry protocols to drive instruction and better meet their needs. Our curriculum is written with different entry points for ELL-SWDs in mind. Scheduling and para professionals are in place and in direct relation to the student's IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The performance of ELLS in the targeted content areas is of great concern at our school. In serving ELLs, the first focus should be on improving the quality of core instruction and making sure that most students have ongoing, high-quality opportunities-to-learn and are succeeding. In ELA our targeted interventions include but not limited to: Interdisciplinary writing across content using the Literacy Design Collaborative( LDC). Inquiry and item analyzis of NYC Performance test to inform instruction. Multiple choice Monday to improve reading comprehension in preparation for the NYC performance Test, ELA Regents, and SAT preparation. College prep classes with a focus on the college essay. Integrated ENL instruction; Engage NY Common Core Curriculum guides: Reading and Writing Supports . Targeted interventions in Social Studies, Science and Math instruction include but are not limited to: scaffolding and skill specific interventions using Tier 2 and 3 words, dictionaries, content specific glossaries in the native language, language scaffolds: mortar words, front loading vocabulary, authentic text, 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  non-fiction text , primary documents and Frayer model . Also, in Math, the Common Core Algebra 1 curriculum is extended to support the ENL students. Instruction is differenttiated based on student language and content needs; our native language instruction supports the second language learning through non-fiction units and academioc mortar vocabulary word. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are very enthusiastic to begin the new Bridge to English Language Acquisition Academy (BELA) to further infuse support and resources for our ENL students. This academy will have common planning time three days a week and ENL/ content tutoring twice a week. We will have a dedicated counselor assisting with the socioemotional factors; a dedicated coordinator and director to focus attention on student work, assessments, credits and attendance. Our school will also begin a new Extended Learning Time program (blended model) to address our struggling students and provide them with options that promote success. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ESL department at GCHS provides students with a nurturing and secure environment. Our students have access to all school functions, facilities and programs. ELNs receive tutoring content opportunities in ESL, ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. In Math, our ENL students receive tutoring opportunities on a daily basis, every period of the school day; the ENL department and all other content areas also offer tutoing, twice a week, during the school day in varied periods. In addition, our Title III progam offers small group instruction, tutoring, during the after-school and Saturday program . Native languge support at the beginning, intermediate and advanced levels are also provided. Our SIFE/Long term ENL students are registered in our Achieve 3000 on-line reading program using both the English and Spanish programs. Our bilingual ENLs are also provided with many opportunities to use the native language to inform English acquisition: Repertorio Español theatre collaboration in NLA classes; CFES( College for Every StudenT) a career, college and mentoring prep program for our ENLS. Achieve 3000 for the ENL and NLA classes. A designated bilingual counselor is provided for our bilingual students. The bilingual counselor is also a collaborating member of our ENL academy, BELA, to assist and provide supports for the whole child. ELL parents are invited and encouraged to participate in our Saturday Adult / ENL program. In our continued efforts to transition our immigrant students to a new culture , educational trips are planned during the academic year as well as in our Summer school program. Our ENL students participate and are an integral part of our extra-curricular clubs and sports events. The community based organization Opportunities for a Better Tomorrow (OBT) partnered with our school to provide in school and out of school opportunities for all students, with a special after school program for Mexican born and SIFE students. This program is geared towards providing students with extra support. This program, operating via a grant, teaches immigrants from Mexico and SIFE students work-based skills, interview preparation, lessons on appropriate work clothing and relations, as well as college and career readiness with internships and work based training opportunities. Students are also eligible to participate in the ELT (Extended Learning Time) portion as well. The ELT program provides students the opportunity to earn additional elective credit.Outreach Letters ongoing. • Phone calls to parents are made on a consistent basis. • Skedula online communication with counselors, parents and faculty. • Home visits ongoing. • Counseling services provided by counselors, social workers as needed . • NYPD collaborates with GCHS to make outreach to students. • Upon return the student is met by a guidance counselor and given his or her already exisiting program for easy transitions back to school. Students are consistently monitored and are given support from teachers, guidance and administration. • Tutoring: during the school day, after-school and Saturdays is made available. • In- school day tutoring available. Also available to our ENLs is our CBO:Upwardbound through Vaughn College. This CBO assist students with tutoring, career goal and planning and college prep. 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  CFES( College for Every Student) is a program specifically for our ENLs . This CBO has a College readiness and mentoring program. CFES makes it possible for our ELLS to visit a number of college campuses , networking opportunities, resume writing and overall post-graduate skills. In addition, the following interventions are offered in order to address the ELL students' socio- emotional needs: • Counseling ongoing as per student need--one counselor designated for all students in the bilingual program and all counselors provide services to ELL students. The SAPIS worker is also bilingual and provides drug intervention in English and Spanish, as well as teaching life skills, assessing for depression and classroom presentations on various topics • Goal planning with teachers and counselors. In class goal planning every marking period. • Academic/emotional and post secondary counseling as per student need. Counselors also provide career and college readiness lessons to students in ESL and blilingual classes. • Parent/teacher involvement ongoing. • YMCA intervention program -Parent Coordinator provides English Language workshops for non-English speaking parents 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All levels of ESL have level appropriate text books and readers. This year we will be infusing new Common Core aligned text in accordance with the new DOE Common Core curricula: The Great Fire, The Glass Castle, Tom Sawyer, Dreaming in Cuban, Enriquez’s Journey, A Doll’s House, Night, and Fahrenheit. For our commanding students we will focus on the classics: Hamlet/Macbeth and The Great Gatsby. We will continue to work on academic vocabulary development using strategies from the work of Dr. Kate Kinsella’s 3D program. Achieve 3000 will continue to support both the ESL and native language classes. To support our ELLS with the rigor of the NYSESLAT exam we will be utilizing Continental’s New York ELLS 9-12 as supplanted material in all the levels. Our expanding and commanding students will also receive ELA instruction using the new NYC High School English Language Arts Core Curriculum: Grades 9-12 (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt: Collections). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Transitional Bilingual Program (Spanish) the instruction is delivered in Spanish and English. Instruction is delivered in both languages: approximately 60 -40 Spanish/English for entering/emerging students; 50-50 for intermediate students and 25- 75 Spanish/English for our expanding students. The native language support is consistent and in accordance with CR-Part 154 mandates. The Free Standing ESL program delivers instruction in English using ESL methodology and literacy strategies. Our bilingual students are prepared for the rigor of the LOTE exam through rigorous native language curricula; these students then continue to the Advanced Placement Spanish Language/ Advanced Placement Literature classes. Our ENL students in a Free Standing ESL Program are also programed for native/ foreign language classes as appropriate: Spanish, Italian classes. All our ENL students are afforded the opportunity to obtain an Advanced Regents diploma.I 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At Grover Clevelang students are placed in level appropriate ENL and native languge classes based on asseesmnet data, emperical data and student academic needs. Our entering/emerging and internmediate students are part of our new BELA academy with a focus on language progression, credits, attenfdance and graduation . All other ENL students may select pathways of interest in their academy of choice contingent on programming needs: STEM Academy, Allied Health and Athletics Academy, Business and Hospitality and the Academy of the Arts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All levels of ESL have level appropriate text books and readers. This year we will be infusing new Common Core aligned text in accordance with the new DOE Common Core curricula: The Great Fire, The Glass Castle, Tom Sawyer, Dreaming in Cuban, Enriquez’s Journey, A Doll’s House, Night, and Fahrenheit. For our commanding students we will focus on the classics: Hamlet/Macbeth and The Great Gatsby. We will continue to work on academic vocabulary development using strategies from the work of Dr. Kate Kinsella’s 3D program. Achieve 3000 will continue to support both the ESL and native language classes. To support our ELLS with the rigor of the NYSESLAT exam we will be utilizing Continental’s New York ELLS 9-12 as 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  supplanted material in all the levels. Our expanding and commanding students will also receive ELA instruction using the new NYC High School English Language Arts Core Curriculum: Grades 9-12 (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt: Collections). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New incoming ENL students and their parents are provided with individual and whole school orientation sessions as well as an open-house activity . Bilingual staff/interpreters are made available for parent support ; we have purchased a translation system to facilate simultaneous translation in order to afford our ENL parents a sense of belonging and commuinty. Low incidence languages translations are provided as needed. ENL parents are also provided with parent meetings, workshops, and symposium opportunities. Our bilingual staff, counselors , Parent Coordinator, Lydia Martinez, ENL department, Pupil Personnel department and teachers collaborate in these school functions throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ENL student in a Free Standing ESL Program are provided with two language chopices: Spanish /Italian . Bilingual ELLS are provided with native language instruction based on native language proficiency, ELE and LOTE aexam results. We offer our Native (Spanish ) speakers the opportunity afforded by the College Board -Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Advanced Placement Spanish Literature classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All support personnel at our school is provided with professional developmnent. For guidance counselors there is departmental, SLC and outside professional developmnet. All other personnel, psychologist , therapists, and secretaries receive central, boroughwide, and cluster professional development to support ENL students. The parent coordinator works oparticuipates in all boroughwide professional development for ENL student. The support staff is also encouraged to attend our afterschool ENL professional development sessions. See below At Grover Cleveland , we begin our school year with full days of professional development for all teachers of ENL students. Teachers receive professional development on th Chancellors’expectations, Common Core Shifts, standards and its application for ENL students on a weekly basis: Mondays for 45 minutes. Once a month the Monday professional development period is ifor 90 minutes. All other meeting calendars are scheduled based on school needs and events. ESL Assistant Principal, Content area Assistant Principals focus on the professional development that addresses the Common Core goals and objectives. Engage New York provides videos, materials and webimars that assist in this endeavor. Bilingual and Native Language teachers and guidance counselors receive professional development through the SLC professional devel;opment time, departmental , whole school initatives, LDC, as well as outside school opportunities. The ENL department receives ongoing professional development by the Achieve 3000 personnel in order to use the data to inform insrtuction and see reading gains and impact: Teachers receive professional development through faculty conferences, HSTW , department meetings, study groups, OELL office, Teachers College, outside resources. Also, teachers will attend workshops, the NYSABE conference, Advance Placement College Board training sessions. Teachers will turnkey the professional development to the 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  school staff during in-house professional development workshops to provide : scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies, methodology and best practices for teaching English Language learners. The focus of our professional development is to prepare our ENL students to meet the expectations of the Common Core Standards , preopare them for the rigor of the NYSESLAT and the NY State Regents in all content areas thus making them college and career ready. Teachers working in the supplementary instructional program will attend 4 sessions of professional development after-school. Quantity & Hours: Four one-hour sessions: Goal setting study groups, curriculum articulation and modification based on Common Core Objectives, literacy strategies. Two one-hour sessions: Best practices and Differentiated Instruction, The New York State Bilingual Common Core initiative (NYSBCCI. One two-hour professional development session: Devoted to the literacy strategies needed to prepare ENLs to meet the city and the standards and to gain a clear understanding of the NYSESLAT/ ELA Regents. Two one hour professional development sessions: Devoted to technology based instructional strategies to develop and enhance ENL students’ skills that will prepare them for the demands of a high tech global society and Achieve3000 software training. Content area teachers are also scheduled to attend outside professional development sessions and workshops. Teachers of ENL students in content areas ( excluding teachers who hold ESL or bilingual licenses as per Jose P.) will receive in-house professional development in collaboration with HSTW. Teachers will receive 5 45 minute sessions on ESL literacy strategies and methodologies . Guidance counselors receive extensive professional development from the ENL Assistant Principal: training includes all CR-Part 154 mandates and regulations, language placement procedures, testing accomadations for ENLs, supplemental services, parental involvement and outreach procedures, NYSESLAT results and outcomes; Regents and LOTE procedures and accreditation as well. Guidance counselors also participate in professional development through their SLC and in their departments. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELLs transitioning to high school are nurtured and supported through our Small learning Communities and our very committed pedagogues. Entering and Emerging students belong to the BELA acdemy where all faculty collaborate to ensure students receive wrap around services. ENL students receive level appropriate placement, native language support and all content is taught with literacy and ESL methodology. Our transtioning ELLs are part of all the curricular and extra-curricular activities of the academy. Besides providing them with the appropriate level texts , they have access to native language dicionaries and glossaries in all classes. ENL students are the focus of our new BELA acdemy and all classrooms are quiped with SMART board tchnology. Students have access to computer LABS and those enrolled in Achieve 3000 have access to an in-class laptop. Throughout the year ELL training is held to support our teachers and fulfill all requirements as per Jose P. Professional development is held at our Monday meetings, department and faculty as well as during special professional development days . Our ELL and literacy liaison, Anna Perkowska, a certified and fully trained pedagogue and LAB/BESIS Coordinator will turnkeys to teachers in collaboration with BFSC. BFSC dedicated ENL specialist will offer professional development: SIOP model, differentiation, technology for ELLS, NYSESLAT prep and Common Core and literacy strategies across content. In the SLC , teacher teams share strategies and turkey best practices on a weekly basis. Teachers also attend professional development as offered from the office of ELLS. attendance sheets and agendas are maintained for all professional development. 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs through our guidance counselors. The guidance counselor will schedule individual parent/student meetings throughout the year and a translator will be available as necessary. During this meeting the guidance counselors will be discussing student progress, goals, language progress, graduation, and college and career readiness. In addition, ENL parent orientations will be ongoing and based on new entry placements. Translation is provided based on language need and in accordance with our Translation and Interpretation plan( see document). ELL parents will also be part of the all school orientations where a myriad of topics are explained and discussed; such as, graduation requirements, school policy and procedure and support programs. Forms and information will be distributed in the parent’s target language as well. Under Title III, ELL parents will be provided with ESL and technology classes on Saturdays of the spring semester. Parents will be invited to be part of our end of semester award ceremony. All classes will be taught by certified Bilingual ESL/NLA /content teachers. The Saturday Instructional Academy will be held between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. Workshops in the following areas will be conducted: Orientation in ESL Learning Standards, Skedula ( student information application), NYSESLAT assessment, graduation and College requirements, housing, asthma, health and nutrition, stress management, teenager behavior patterns and others. Parents are notified of programs and services provided via written notification. All letters are translated into target languages with the assistance of the DOE translation unit, bilingual staff and parent coordinator. Parent workshops will be facilitated by ESL/Bilingual Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Bilingual/ESL teachers, counselors and/or administrators. Parents are invited to collaborate and participate in our school extra curricular activities: concert, trips, ceremomies, sports, and all workshops. Our Ninth Grade parents are invited to report conferencing days, parent teacher conferences and award ceremonies. Staff, including parent coordinator and teachers, are supported by trained counselors of ELL students in the development of programs and interventions to assist our ENL students in their transition and career objectives. Activities include, but are not limited to: case conferencing, parent/teacher conferencing, AIS, phone calls, letters, e-mails and consistent Skedula parent school communication. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELL students include: • Freshman Orientation: 9.3.15 • College Fair: 10.8.15 • Financial Aid Night: 11.23.15 • Career Fair: 4.11.16 • Senior Orientation: 10.1.15 • Workshops o Drug and Alcohol Use and Abuse in Teens: What Every Parent Should Know: 10.19.15 o Understanding Graduation Requirements and How to Help Your Child Achieve Them: 11.23.15 o Understanding Your Child’s Social Media Life: 2.15.15 o Helping Your Child Cope with Stress: 4.18.15Paste response to question here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  2018-19 SCEP-P 83 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Denise Vittor, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 84  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 85 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Grover Cleveland Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey DBN: 24Q485 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Lydia Martinez Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents complete the home language surveys. The data collected and entered into ATS provides a summary of home languages. It is from this report that we determine our translation needs,. We also evaluate the language preference needs through our school survey, parents association meetings, email and conversations with parents through the parent coordinator, guidance and deans offices, 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Armenian Arabic Bengali Cham Chinese Any Cantonese French Greek Haitian Creole Italian Mandarin Nahuatl Nepali English Pashto Philipino Punjabi Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Senufo Slovak Spanish Slovenian 41 3 122 23 1 46 0 4 2 1 1 0 6 15 1371 1 3 9 41 3 2 2 4 1 1007 1 1.51 0.11 4.48 0.84 0.04 1.69 0 0.15 0.07 0.04 0.04 0 0.22 0.55 49 3 124 25 1 33 3 4 2 1 0 10 6 15 1.8 0.11 4.56 0.92 0.04 1.21 0.11 0.15 0.07 0.04 0 0.37 0.22 0.55 50.37 1346 49.47 0.04 0.11 0.33 1.51 0.11 0.07 0.07 0.15 0.04 36.99 0.04 1 3 10 43 3 2 3 4 0 1015 1 0.04 0.11 0.37 1.58 0.11 0.07 0.11 0.15 0 37.3 0.04 2018-19 SCEP-P 87  Thai Tibetan Turkish Urdu Ukrainian 1 1 2 4 4 0.04 0.04 0.07 0.15 0.15 1 1 2 5 5 0.04 0.04 0.07 0.18 0.18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Senior Orientation - Fall College Night - Fall September Parent Teacher Conference announcements - Fall and Spring October Financial Aid workshop- Fall Attendance letters - throughout the year November translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. For all documents listed the school utilizes the DOE translation services. Whatever documents 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  Progress Reports - Fall and Spring Parent Workshops - Fall and Spring Promotion in Doubt - Spring Senior Failure Letters - Fall and Spring Congratulatory Letters - Fall and Spring Freshman Orientation/Parent Information - Spring December September through June Monthly February need updating are sent to the DOE service at least one month before to ensure a timely turnaround. Documents are requested in Spanish and Arabic. DOE translation services DOE translation services Progress Reports are printed via Skedula (Pupil Path) in the parents Home Language Promotion in Doubt Letters are printed via 2018-19 SCEP-P 89  ATS in the preferred home language DOE translation service DOE translation service DOE translation service 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Freshman Orientation/Parent Information - Fall College Night - Fall Senior Orientation - Fall Parent Teacher Conference announcements - Fall and Spring Financial Aid Workshop - Fall Progress Reports - Fall and Spring Parent Workshops - Fall and Spring plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For each event, our school provides simultaneous translation through a DOE approved vendor in both Spanish and Arabic. September October September November/March 2018-19 SCEP-P 90  December Monthly 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will utilize our Global Connect system and our Pupil Path System to alert families of an emergency as the messages go out in the preferred home language. We will also utilize, when available, teachers to make personal phone calls in the home language of the parent to communicate about any emergencies, Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The CR A-663 will be introduced and reviewed for the faculty during the opening day conference by the school's LAC and the APPS. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-P 91  The school posts the availability of translation and interpretation services in the guidance office and general office, Main Desk and Deans' office, as well as the ISS office, Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? School will use the parent survey, as well as regular and ongoing counselor conversations with parents, deans conversations with parents, Attendance team conversations and PC interviews with parents to gather feedback about accuracy of language services. 2018-19 SCEP-P 92 
