2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q502 School Name: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JEAN WOODS-POWELL 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Information Technology High School 30Q502 343000011502 9-12 School Number (DBN): 21-16 44 th Road, Long Island City, NY 11101 (718) 937-4270 (718) 937-5236 Phone Number: Fax: Natalie Hyde nbousigardhyde@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jean D. Woods-Powell Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Patricia Lectora William Tait Jorge Cordero Said Aly Nathan Vazquez Mariela Lopez N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Rm. 405,Flushing, NY 11354 ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-3517 Phone Number: (718) 281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: (718) 391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jean D. Woods-Powell Patricia Lectora William Tait Said Aly Nathan Vazquez Mariela Lopez Teresa Mendoza Ling Yu SamillahFeliciano Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JorgeCordero Jennifer Lim Joyce SoberalLopez Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? This mission of Information Technology High School is to prepare students to be independent thinkers and problem solvers who are ready for careers in technology and are productive, self-sufficient members of our global community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Information Technology is a high school with 1037 students from grade 9 through 12. The school population comprises 11.9% Black, 59.3% Hispanic, 8.5% White, 19.3% Asian, and 1% Native American students. The student body includes 7.9% English Language Learners and 19.1% Special Education students. Boys account for 78% of the students enrolled and girls account for 22%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017 – 2018 was 89.2%. The graduation rate for the school year 2017 – 2018 was 78%. Our school-wide positive behavioral intervention system (PBIS) aims to provide supports which encourage students to engage in academic and social-emotional behavioral practices that will lead them toward a healthy path of academic success and involves many stakeholders throughout the school community. Our Data specialists provides a Social Emotional Learning (SEL) survey to all incoming Freshmen so as to provide early identification of students who may demonstrate academic risk factors and college readiness deficiencies not revealed by standard assessments. These students are recruited for our peer tutoring program, coordinated by the school's National Honor Society adviser. Our attendance and guidance teams provide referrals of students who may have not meet he initial criteria for peer tutoring but who would still benefit. Our data team provides progress updates for all identified students at the conclusion of marking periods. Our PTA organizes events and provides financial resources for events that rewarded achievement. Classroom teachers provided school PBIS reward tickets to students via teacher discretion. They also distribute certificates generated by the school's COSA that acknowledge students who have met attendance and grade criteria. We provide time at least once each month for student recognition during our 3rd period attendance class. Teachers also provided follow up lesson for skills developed during "Elevate!" Freshmen program. The school's COSA organizes and implements plan for Schoolwide PBIS school reward store, where tickets earned by students can be exchanged for items offered there. We are continuing our participation in College Access for All. Our College & Career Readiness Inquiry/Planning Team consists of the Principal, AP of Guidance, College Adviser, four School Counselors, WBL Coordinator, and selected ELA Teachers. The goal is to ensure effective system and structure to communicate high expectations connected to college and career readiness. We looked at PSAT/SAT scores to identify the discrepancies between high school GPA and the standardized testing scores (SAT, ACT, etc.). We are promoting Khan Academy, Method Test Prep, and Virtual Job Shadow to motivate students and families to reduce the gap. We collaborate with ELA teachers to implement the college and career exploration lessons that we developed for 9thgrade students. We also designed the 10thgrade workshop series to be implemented this school year. Various advisement opportunities, such as College Trips outside NYC, Grade Level Assemblies, Grade Level Parent Assemblies, College and Career readiness night, College and Career Fair, Small Group Sessions, Individual College Advisory, NYS College Application Week, NYS Financial Aid Week, NYS Career exploration week, College Application lock-in night, College Admission Representative College Outreach, CUNY Visits, PSAT/SAT School Day, College Signing Day, Interviewing & Resume Writing Workshop, Transition Linkage, provide students and families with an overall vision of the pathway from entry to high school to graduation and beyond. ITHS continues to expand Advanced Placement opportunities for our students. During the 2017-2018 school year, ITHS offered AP Biology, AP Calculus, AP English Literature, AP English Composition, AP US History, AP World History, AP Spanish, and AP Computer Science. We will be adding AP Psychology in the Fall 2018. We also take pride in our NYS Approved Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs, all of which offer student choice in CTE areas of study. These academies include Web Design and Video Production. As reflected in our CTE Standards Crosswalks, all academies are aligned to the CDOS, CCLS, and ISTE standards. Students in each academy use technology and digital media strategically and capably as evidenced by projects and products. The admissions process for the academies is highly competitive due to a limited number of seats available. The selection criteria include: Grade Point Average (GPA), attendance, student preference, teacher recommendations, and an interview with a CTE committee. We continue to invest in our CTE programs through the addition of CTE certified teachers. We will be 2018-19 CEP 10  adding a Commercial Arts teacher this fall and will work with the Career and Technical Education office to develop a Gaming sequence. We have a dual credit agreement for our CTE students at Queensborough Community College. Additionally, 99% of Seniors enrolled in CTE programs reviewed for NYS approval last year passed at least one industry recognized technical assessment last year and 94.4% of Seniors enrolled in CTE programs graduated with a NYS CTE endorsement. We also continue to invest in our CTE program by maintaining a full time WBL Coordinator. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. First year students in the school-wide lowest third struggle with meeting the credit accumulation target as evidenced by 72.8% of first year students in the school-wide lowest third who earned 10 or more credits overall and six credits in core subjects across at least 3 core subject areas. Additionally, 66.7% of first year ENL students and 75.5% of first year Special Education students meeting the credit accumulation target. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school continues to make progress in the Framework for Great Schools indicator Collaborative Teachers as evidenced by a score of 3.17 Collaborative Teachers on the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. The school continues to struggle in Rigorous Instruction, achieving a 2.52 in Rigorous Instruction on the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q502 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1007 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 81 78 7 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 11 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 79.1% % Reduced Lunch 8.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 59.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.6 2% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 79% 80.3% 14.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 216 169 6 88.8% 5.0% 19.0% 11.7% 19.5% 1.3% 8 14% 7.2 N/A N/A 88% 84% 83.6% 21% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 93% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. Additionally, 92% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. However, 76% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for building students' knowledge through content-rich non-fiction and 79% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. Also, 48% of students say that they are challenged in their classes and 54% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class. 49% of students who took the January 2018 English Regents exam answered items correctly that were aligned to CCLS ELA standard R.3 (Analyze a complex set of ideas or sequence of events and explain how specific individuals, ideas, or events interact and develop over the course of the text), 51% answered items correctly that were aligned to CCLS ELA standard R.5 (Analyze and evaluate the effectiveness of the structure an author uses in his or her exposition or argument, including whether the structure makes points clear, convincing, and engaging), 60% answered items correctly that were aligned to CCLS ELA standard RL.4 (Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases), and 61% answered items correctly that were aligned to CCLS ELA standard RL.5 (Demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word meanings). As indicated by the last data point, the priority need is to further higher order thinking by promoting student growth in analyzing complex ideas and structure and determining meaning of words and phrases in context. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in Math, Science, ELA, and Social Studies will demonstrate growth in analyzing complex ideas and structure and determining meaning of words and phrases in context as measured by a 2% increase in the number of students passing (65% or higher) the NYS Algebra 1 Regents examination. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet three times each week to develop rigorous lessons that include instructional strategies that make use of student-to-student interactions in all classes, as well as make use of UDL, implementation of targeted assessments, and other adjustments to ensure access by all learners. Teams will perform analysis of results of student work and assessments to help guide their lesson planning process. Core Content Teachers Ongoing through June 2019 Core Content Department Supervisors ICT Teachers Teachers will develop lessons that aligns to the Superintendent instructional focus and other models, paying careful attention to matrices provided by Superintendent around rigor for support. Core Content Teachers Ongoing through June 2019 Core Content Department Supervisors Departmental Supervisors ICT teachers Core Content Teachers Teachers will develop action plans based on gap analysis of formative and summative assessments and ensure that instruction make use of the school action plan. Teachers will provide after school tutoring and targeted Regents prep for students who have not scored 65+ (also considering the college readiness score of 70+). Math supervisor will review the June 2018 and January 2019 Math ISAs with teachers and teachers will develop goals and actions plans for these students based on a gap analysis of the June 2018 and January 2019 Algebra 1 and 2 Regents examinations. Teachers will develop curriculum to provide additional literacy and numeracy supports to ENL and Special Needs students using the Universal Design for Learning (UDL). Ongoing through June 2019 Core Content Department Supervisors Departmental Supervisors Instructional Leads ICT teachers Core Content teachers Core Content Department Supervisors Core Content teachers By October 2018 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers will develop one multi-lesson CCLS aligned project per semester focused on analyzing complex ideas and structure and determining meaning of words and phrases in context. Math teachers will also focus on numeracy and problem solving skills. Teachers will present their findings at staff PD. ICT teachers Core Content teachers By December, 2018 ICT teachers Department Supervisors Core Content teachers ICT teachers ICT teachers All students will be assessed each marking period to determine current Lexile level using HMH Reading Inventory. Teachers will use Lexile Analyzer from Lexile.com to determine Lexile level of text results to differentiate text for individual students, targeting text to students' stretch level. All teachers By May, 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Departmental Supervisors All teachers Departmental Supervisors Testing Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least 45 minutes will be set aside each week for teachers to contact families and provide feedback on instructional supports available. Ongoing email updates through school's JupiterGrades system from teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators. 2018-19 CEP 15  Ongoing parental contact by guidance. Ongoing parental contact through school Parent Coordinator. Presentations by principal or designee regarding instructional strategies and Common Core aligned tasks and projects during monthly PTA meetings. Information sessions and individual student meetings during parent-teacher conferences. PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCES Fall 2018 Spring 2019 Thursday, November 29, 2018 – Evening, 4:30 pm – 7:00 pm Friday, November 30, 2018 – Afternoon, 12:30 pm – 2:30 pm Thursday, March 7, 2019 – Evening, 4:30 pm – 7:00 pm Friday, March 8, 2019 – Afternoon, 12:30 pm – 2:30 pm Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · NYSTL funds are used to purchase HMH Reading Inventory for ELA classes and Achieve 3000. . NYSTL funds are also used to purchase Achieve 3000 for ENL and Special Education classes. · C4E funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Science teacher and Mathematics teacher to provide direct instruction to students who are enrolled in Science and Mathematics courses. · TL Strong Schools Strong Communities funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Social Studies teacher to provide direct instruction to students who are enrolled in Social Studies courses. · TL FSF funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science, and elective teacher to provide direct instruction to students who are enrolled in these courses · TL FSF funds will be used to provide students after school tutoring · TL FSF funds will be used to provide per session for curriculum development and teacher team analysis of student work · TL Summer in the City funds will be used to provide students access to Summer School courses · Title I SWP and TL Translation funds are used to provide translations for non-English speaking parents during parent meetings and trainings · Title III LEP funds will used to provide ELL students ongoing after school tutoring 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the number of students achieving a 65 or higher on the January 2019 NYS Math Regents exam in Algebra 1 Regents examination will increase by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January 2019 Algebra 1 Regents examination. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 81% of students respond that the school provides them with information about the college application process. Additionally, 84% of students say that adults at the school encourage them to continue their education after high school. However, 40% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class and only 48% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. Additionally, 78.7% of 1st year students earned 10+ credits last year and 72.8% of 1st year students in the Schoolwide Lowest Third earned 10+ credits last year. As indicated by the last data point, the priority need is to improve credit accumulation of 1st year students overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 5% in the number of first year students earning 10 or more credits (from 78.7% to 83.7%) as measured by the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Generate and administer diagnostic assessment. Teachers of common course codes meet to develop one diagnostic assessment to be administered to each student enrolled in that course code. Items are selected from Achievement Series, Castle Learning, ExamView, ExamGen, and other Regents exams and are aligned with the CCLS. Items selected also range in difficulty and reflect the skills and concepts aligned to the NYS Regents exam and grade level CCLS for the subject area. Overall students By October 2018 Teachers, Department Supervisors Teachers will revise instruction in response to identified student needs. Teachers of common course codes meet to conduct a data analysis of the diagnostic assessment and revise course code aligned curriculum maps and student goals based on results of analysis. Overall students Ongoing through June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Department Supervisors Generate academic intervention plans for each student who fails a class and monitor progress and provide feedback to students and parents (through Jupitergrades, parental outreach, phone calls). Teachers identify areas in which students are struggling using benchmark assessments such as common course code aligned midterm assessments, class assessment, and other student work product. Teachers generate academic intervention plans based on identified areas of need for students and revise student goals accordingly. Teachers conduct parental engagement and involvement and also meet with students, parents and guidance counselors to discuss needs and goals described in intervention plans. Core content teachers utilize new Scantron "Achievement Series" software to track and monitor progress of all students, including students in the school-wide lowest third, throughout grades 9-12. Overall students and parents Ongoing through June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Students, Parents, Department Supervisors All students Ongoing through 2019 Lowest Third Grades 9-12 Teachers, Counselors, Department Supervisors Perform social/emotional learning assessment of all incoming Freshmen and all rising sophomores who have fallen behind in credit accumulation so as to identify students who are at Freshmen Sophomores (all) September 2018 Guidance, COSA, Testing Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 19  risk of falling behind in credit accumulation and being promoted. Review credit accumulation of all Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors to identify those at risk of failing to be promoted. COSA will meet with first year students who did not earn 5+ credits and assign them a peer tutor. Student and peer tutor will meet 2 days a week to set goals and review course work and assessments and provide needed supports. COSA will monitor tutoring sessions and provide feedback to tutors. Guidance Counselor and AP Guidance will meet with parents to review current level of performance, action plan, and progress of student. Freshmen Sophomores (lowest third) Juniors/Seniors (all) Juniors/Seniors (lowest third) Sophomores (lowest third not meeting target), parents Ongoing through June 2019 Guidance Guidance, COSA, Testing Coordinator Guidance Perform Academic Intervention Services tailored to Freshmen and Sophomore identified areas of growth including special events to encourage student engagement and build student skills and provide peer tutoring targeted to student academic weakness. Perform guidance and parental intervention services, including PPT meetings for students who have fallen behind (all grades/lowest third). AP Guidance, Guidance Counselors, COSA February 2019 through June 2019 All Students/All grades Ongoing through June 2019 Events to be held approximately: All students/all grades 10/9 COSA, Student Government Adviser, Student Government, Overall students Guidance Counselors, AP Guidance and Teachers. 11/13 12/18 2/12 2018-19 CEP 20  3/26 4/16 5/21 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At least 45 minutes will be set aside each week for teachers to contact families and provide feedback on student academic progress and instructional supports available. Ongoing email updates through school's JupiterGrades system from teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators. Ongoing parental contact by guidance. Ongoing parental contact through school Parent Coordinator. Presentations by principal or designee regarding student academic progress and instructional supports during monthly PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · NYSTL funds are also used to purchase Achieve 3000 for Special Needs classes · NYSTL funds are used to purchase AdvancePath Academic's Resiliency Assessment, Castle Learning, Scantron Achievement Series · C4E funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Math teacher and Science teacher to provide direct instruction to students who are enrolled in Mathematics and Science courses. · TL FSF funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science, and elective teacher to provide direct instruction to students who are enrolled in these courses · TL FSF funds will be used to provide students after school tutoring · Title I SWP funds will be used to provide per diem coverage for teachers to attend PPTs and professional development activities related Resiliency, Castle Learning, and Scantron · TL Summer in the City funds will be used to provide students access to Summer School courses 2018-19 CEP 21  · Title I SWP Translation Services and TL Translation Services funds are used to provide translations for non-English speaking parents during parent meetings and trainings · Title III LEP and Title III Immigrant funds will used to provide ELL students ongoing after school tutoring Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 70% of first year students will have earned 5 or more credits as measured by STARS Custom Report 1.33 for Fall Semester 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to Graduation tracker and Custom Report 1.20 generated at the end of each marking period and semester and Custom Report 1.33 generated and the end of Fall Semester 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 84% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction and 87% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. However, only 78% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together and only 74% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction with other grade levels. As indicated by the last data point, the priority need is to further teacher collaboration in designing instructional programs and coordinating their teaching with instruction with other grade levels through the lesson plan study process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of core content teachers will engage in a cycle of lesson plan study with their content area teacher team. Attainment of this goal will be measured by a 5% increase in the number of teachers who respond favorably to the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide component "Peer Collaboration." 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will meet during Monday afternoon PD sessions to engage in professional development focused on UDL, DOK, and commonly agreed upon engaging instructional strategies (such as Socratic Seminar, Add Ask Argue and Think-Pair-Share-Write, QTF). Core subject teachers will engage in Common Planning Time (CPT)/Inquiry Team meetings during the school day to plan lessons, analyze/create assessments and student work and provide peer feedback on lesson and unit planning and implementation using Lesson Study as a model for visitation. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Ongoing through June 2019 Instructional Leads Department Supervisors Ongoing through June 2019 Instructional Leads Department Supervisors Data Specialist PD Committee Content teachers & Teacher teams Instructional Leads Teacher teams will engage in two (2) complete Lesson Plan Study cycles over the course of the semester. Department Supervisors Content teachers & Teacher teams September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher teams will engage in two (2) inter visitations with another teacher team's Lesson Plan Study cycle per semester. Teachers will also engage in inter visitations with corresponding content area teachers at partner schools Teachers By June 2019, Instructional Leads will undergo 15 hours of professional development to learn how to lead CPT meetings which are driven by and grounded in classroom data. Instructional Leads October 2018 through May 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Instructional Leads Department Supervisors Teach Teams Instructional Leads Department Supervisors Instructional Leads 2018-19 CEP 24 Throughout the school year, APs, Guidance Counselors, Instructional Leads and the school's Data Specialist will meet once per month to examine the most current data and to norm the Instructional Leads in relevant school-wide priorities and goals to be incorporated into common planning time meetings Department Supervisors Department Supervisors Ongoing through June 2019 Department Supervisors Principal Department Supervisors Guidance Counselors Data Specialist Instructional Leads Guidance Counselors Data Specialist Instructional Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least 45 minutes will be set aside each week for teachers to contact families and provide feedback on student academic progress and instructional supports available. Ongoing email updates through school's JupiterGrades system from teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators. Ongoing parental contact by guidance. Ongoing parental contact through school Parent Coordinator. Presentations by principal or designee regarding teacher collaboration and parental supports during monthly PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Title I SWP funds will be used to provide coverage for teachers participating in intervisitations with partner school · Title I SWP funds will be used to provide coverage for teachers participating in Lesson Study cycles · TL FSF funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed content area supervisors 2018-19 CEP 25  · TL FSF funds will support salary of ELA Instructional Lead · TL Salary Subsidy 2019 funds will support salary of Mathematics Instructional Lead · C4E funds will support salary of Science Instructional Lead · TL FSF funds will support salary of Social Studies Instructional Lead · TL 09 C4E CTT funds will support salary of Special Education Instructional Lead Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teacher team members will have performed one lesson study cycle and will analyze the student work generated form the lesson study together. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team meeting minutes from pre lesson study meeting, teacher generated low inference observation notes from in-class visitation, team minutes from post lesson study meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school and 94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school is strongly committed to shared decision making. Also, 92% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent/guardian and teacher leaders. However, 53% of teachers say the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers and 71% of teachers say the principal/school leader at their school carefully tracks student academic progress. Additionally, in regard to Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP), components 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3D (Assessment for Learning) had the lowest average scores of 2.86 and 2.81 respectively as reflected in the 2017-2018 end of year Advance report. As indicated by the last data point, the priority needs are to improve teacher performance in both Danielson components 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3D (Assessment for Learning). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 75% of teachers will earn an average score of 3.0 in components 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3D (Assessment for Learning) as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching average scores on Advance. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development, facilitated by instructional leads, administration and/or external P.D. on Danielson focus component 1E and 3D and best practices. Principal’s cabinet will meet at least once weekly for 90 minutes to discuss daily routines and monitor student achievement towards graduation. Teacher teams by subject area would meet three times weekly to engage in best practices, develop, modify, prepare and plan coherent curricula, lessons, and assessments to address gaps and improve student achievement. Teachers Assistant Principals and Principals Teacher teams September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, Principal Assistant Principals and Principals September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals and Instructional Leads. Assistant Principals and Principal will conduct timely observations aligned to observation cycles and track progress of best practices based on student data and feedback. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal Instructional Leads attend instructional leadership PD opportunities with the DOE. Instructional Lead Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Lead Teachers Principal and Assistant Principals engage in at least two supervisory instructional rounds each semester to norm the Danielson rubric and assess level of rigor in the classrooms. School administration will engage in JESA visits with Teacher Development and Evaluation coach. Assistant Principals and Principals September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least 45 minutes will be set aside each week for teachers to contact families and provide feedback on student academic progress and instructional supports available. Ongoing email updates through school's JupiterGrades system from teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators. 2018-19 CEP 28  Ongoing parental contact by guidance. Ongoing parental contact through school Parent Coordinator. Presentations by principal or designee regarding school and parent leadership parent engagement activities during monthly PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · TL FSF funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Assistant Principals · TL FSF funds will support salaries of certified, licensed, appointed Instructional Lead Teachers · Title I SWP funds will be used to provide coverage for teachers participating in instructional leadership PDs during school day · TL Salary Subsidy 2019 funds will support salary of Mathematics Instructional Lead · C4E funds will support salary of Science Instructional Lead · TL FSF funds will support salary of Social Studies Instructional Lead · TL 09 C4E CTT funds will support salary of Special Education Instructional Lead Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all Advance eligible teachers will be rated at least once in components 1E and 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance School Level Summary Report, Advance MOTP Dashboard, and MOTP Score Tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 89% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn and 92% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. However, the school earned only a 2.57 on the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in the area Strong Family-Community Ties. Also, only 81% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. As indicated by the last data point, the priority need is to improve parent involvement in school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will demonstrate growth in parent involvement in school as measured by a 3% increase from 77% to 80% in parents responding positively on the School Practices and Conditions section of the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide in the "Parent Involvement in School" category. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school parent coordinator will provide training for parents on use of JupiterGrades and NYC School accounts. Parents and families. The Parent Coordinator, College Adviser, and WBL Coordinator will invite parents to attend workshops via school mailing, phone contact, personal invitation, electronic communication (i.e. email, Global Connect Phone system, JupiterGrades, school website). Parents and families. October 2018 and March 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, College Adviser, WBL Coordinator, Department Supervisor Parent Coordinator will update parent handbook to reflect meeting calendar and workshop/training opportunities. The Parent Coordinator will be present at Parent Teacher Conferences and will present/discuss upcoming College and Career Readiness workshops and presentations. Parents and families. Translation services will be provided for all participating parents and invitations and parent communication related to parental workshops will be provided in multiple languages. Parents and families. A "Parental Outreach Period" will be designated for at least 45 minutes each week. During this time, teachers and guidance counselors will contact parents to offer updates on student progress and enter parental contacts into a parental contact log. Parents and families. Guidance Counselors will invite parents to meet with teachers and other support staff each week during Parental Outreach Time. Parents and families. Ongoing through June 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Ongoing through June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Teachers, Guidance Counselors, and Parent Coordinator Teachers Guidance Counselors Department supervisors Parent Coordinator will invite to parents visit classroom during instruction time. Parents and families. Ongoing through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Department Supervisors 2018-19 CEP 31 Parent Coordinator, College Adviser, WBL Coordinator, COSA, and Senior Adviser will invite parents to help plan and chaperone school trips, community service, and events. Award ceremonies will be integrated into parent meetings to increase participation. Parents and families. Ongoing through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, College Adviser, WBL Coordinator, COSA, Senior Adviser, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Center at Western Queens, RIIS Settlement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · TL Translation Services funds will be used to provide translation services to participating parents · Title I SWP Translation Services funds will be used to provide translation services to participating parents · TL FSF funds will be used to provide per session for College Advisor, Guidance Counselors, and other staff members to conduct parent College and Career Readiness workshops and training sessions · Title I SWP parent involvement funds will be used to provide per session for College Advisor, Guidance Counselors, and other staff members to conduct parent College and Career Readiness workshops and training sessions · TL FSF and CA4ALL funds will be used to support postage for parent communications · Title I SWP parent involvement will be used to support postage for parent communications · Title I SWP funds will be used to purchase license for Blackboard automated phone system · NYSTL funds will be used to purchase licenses for JupiterGrades Online Student Information System · Title I SWP Parent and Family Engagement funds will be used to purchase food and snacks for parent workshops and meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 32  By February 2019, 50% of parents will have visited the school and participated in events such College and Career Parent Nights, College Lock-In Night Dinner, CTE Parent Orientation, Parent-Teacher Conferences, etc. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE system for documenting parental visits; parent sign in sheets for school meetings and events and parent coordinator and guidance counselors logs of parents visit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Schoolwide lowest third ● ESL/Special Ed ● Lack of progress in earning English credits Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) In school tutoring, After school tutoring, After school ESL program, Saturday Support Academy, Saturday Academy, Regents Prep Academy, Achieve 3000 ● Score less than 65 on English Regents exam ● Lexilescore below Proficient for grade level ● Schoolwide lowest third ● ESL/Special Ed ● Lack of progress in earning Math credits ● Score less than 65 on Algebra and/or Geometry Regents exam ● Schoolwide lowest third ● ESL/Special Ed In school tutoring, After school tutoring, After schoolESLprogram, Saturday Support Academy, Saturday Academy, Regents Prep Academy, Achieve 3000 In school tutoring, After school tutoring, After schoolESLprogram, Saturday Support Academy, Saturday Academy, Regents Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Individual and/or small group, tutoring, direct instruction During school, After school; Saturdays Individual and/or small group, tutoring, direct instruction During school, After school; Saturdays Individual and/or small group, tutoring, direct instruction During school, After school; Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies ● Lack of progress in earning Science credits Prep Academy, Achieve 3000 ● Score less than 65 on Living Environment Regents exam ● Schoolwide lowest third ● ESL/Special Ed ● Lack of progress in earning Social Studies credits In school tutoring, After school tutoring, After schoolESLprogram, Saturday Support Academy, Saturday Academy, Regents Prep Academy, Achieve 3000 ● Score less than 65 on Global and/or US History Regents exam Individual and/or small group, tutoring, direct instruction During school, After school; Saturdays At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Mandated counseling on IEP Mandated counseling with guidance counselor Individual and small group Pullout during school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 59 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. After school tutoring, peer tutoring, Saturday Regents Prep Academy, Saturday Support Academy, instructional supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. While we're proud that 100% of our HQT staff return last year, we have taken the following measures to attract and retain HQT: Form partnerships with local colleges and universities to host education students as observers and as student teachers. We leverage these relationships by regularly communicating with these institutions when recruiting potential candidates to fill open teaching positions We encourage Special Education teachers to acquire a NYS Supplemental Certification in a core content area that matches their ICT assignment. We encourage all teachers to seek out professional development opportunities on a bi-weekly basis. Keeping in line with NYSED's "Plan to enhance Teacher Quality", we will adhere to SED strategy 4 of seeking out "... effective partnerships to achieve teacher quality goals and close student achievement gaps..." by: establishing and maintaining relationships with such partnership organizations as NYC Men Teach, NYC Teaching Fellows, as well as Teacher College's Peace Corps Fellows programs 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Core subject teachers meet weekly in content-based teacher teams to share best practices, review student performance artifacts, and revise curriculum. ● All teachers and paraprofessionals participate in weekly school-wide professional development focused on the Danielson framework and Common Core State Standards 2018-19 CEP 38  ● Instructional Leads generate and regularly update PD Plan ● Core subject teachers are engaged in an ongoing cycle of lesson study that includes teacher intervisitations and feedback sessions Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In Fall of 2018:  Instructional Leads will perform one staff-wide PD and 2 Teacher-Team wide PDs on how to analyze assessment results and develop action plans.  Data Specialist will perform one PD on how to analyze student assessment data  Teacher Teams will generate analysis results and decide on discipline-based action plans for students based on the results of student baseline exams and discipline-wide, Common Core aligned project. Based on these results, Teacher Teams will develop action plans.  Perform one Lesson Study cycle, then meet among themselves to analyze the effective use of actions plans and revise if needed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4, Section 5C Part 4, Section 5D Part 4 Section 5E Part 4 N/A Section 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4 N/A Section 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4, Section 5C Part 4, Section 5D Part 4, Section 5E Part 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $505,568.00 0 $12,366.00 0 $6,739,374.00 X N/A X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 40  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Information Technology High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Information Technology High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; college readiness, literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family College Readiness events; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing online student information system for regular electronic communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Information Technology High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: During 2017-18 school year the ENL department ran an after-school supplemental program. As we evaluated the performance of our English Language Learners who participated in one of the ENL supplemental program, we found the following: students’ reading/writing scores increased (ELA & NYSESLAT results), most students either moved up in ENL level (45%) or tested out of the program by scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT (20% of total ELL population). Most students showed impressive results on the Regents examinations and by earning grade appropriate number of credits towards meeting the graduation requirements. As such, our school has decided to fund a strong ENL Title III after school program starting October 2018. This program will provide ELL’s with supplemental instruction during after school program. The After School Program specifically addresses the individual deficiencies students have in English. The After School Program will service approximately 60 students by two certified TESOL teachers for approximately 78 sessions. Classes will begin early October and will end in June before the Regents exam week. Students will alternate between the two ENL teachers: one will lead liberal arts immersion sessions, the other – math and sciences. Areas of concentration include but not limited to: Regents prep, eliminating wrong answers, planning for constructed response, NYSESLAT Prep, vocabulary & grammar development, listening skills, and pronunciation. This year's instructional shift will address the SAT and PSAT tutoring. Historically, language learners fall far below national averages on both assessments. We recognize that with targeted tutoring in vocabulary, reading, and grammar we can significantly reduce the gap and provide our students with wider range of college opportunities. General supplies will include Barron's PSAT/NMSQT with CD-ROM, 16th Edition. These materials are supplementary and will not be used during classroom instruction. The program will run on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, from 2 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Records of attendance will be kept by teachers and submitted to ENL coordinator - Olga Sakhno - at the end of each term. In order to maximize attendance, after-school program notification letters will be sent out no later than the second week of classes. Parents' preferred language list is available at ENL coordinator's office. As per home language survey forms we have Spanish, Urdu, Polish, Romanian, Hindi, Bengali, and Tibetan home languages. Pending Language Interpretation Service availability, as well as multilingual building staff, every effort will be made to provide parents with information regarding the program in the language that they can understand. There’s extensive research that links the skill of reading to academic success. At the request of ESL department, school data specialist provided a list of students (9 & 10 grade) whose 8th grade scores are below grade level. These students are at-risk. Some type of intervention is essential. We will provide the students with remedial reading instruction along side the language learning component. Our program will also have a NYSESLAT and the Regents prep components. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Supplemental instructional materials, including the use of technology and the wireless mobile lab, will be provided to augment content area instruction. General instructional supplies and computer supplies will be purchased to support the program. Group size will be maintained at 12-15 students per teacher. Certified ENL and content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on Literacy using ENL strategies to help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT and on state assessment exams. General instructional supplies such as chart paper, markers, and certificates of achievement will be purchased to support the academy as well as Getting ready for the NYSESLAT Grade 9 - 12 Class Pack (30 Student Books & 1 Teacher's Manual). During the months of December, January, and May the school has content area teachers conduct review sessions for students eligible to take the Regents exams. The sessions in Social Studies, Math, Living Environment, and ELA will be conducted in the presence and with the assistance of the licensed ENL teacher and will be available for all ENL students eligible to take the Regents. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: In order to explore teaching methods designed to support language learners in spite of prevailing one-dimentional accountability pressures, we are enlisting the assistance of 19th Annual Language Series at Bank Street College of Education. The 2018 Language Series will take place on Saturday, October 27 and feature a keynote presentation by Nancy Cloud, Professor Emerita, M.Ed. in TESL Program, Feinstein School of Education and Human Development, Rhode Island College, Providence, RI. The 2018 Language Series will explore teaching methods designed to support educators who are seeking to enhance their practice in spite of prevailing, one-dimensional accountability pressures. We will focus on student engagement in both language and content development through multiple pathways: music, project based learning, multimodal literacy, and others. Dr. Nancy Cloud will lead us in the exploration of this topic in her keynote. Workshops with experienced practitioners will inspire and engage us through hands-on activities and specific examples. As a participant, you will take away concrete ideas for immediate implementation in your settings. Come and re-energize your practice by learning from the experts in the field. They will share multiple ways to create and support social and academic language growth in today's diverse educational settings that include ENL’s (English as a new language) learners as well as those who struggle in their native language. Our workshops will address different age ranges and needs. Conference participants will: · · · · Learn to create transformative moments of language growth in the classroom. Re-energize their practice with developmentally appropriate tools and techniques. Choose from interactive, hands-on sessions that match their personal interests. Meet and network with peers and explore an exchange of progressive ideas together. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Six teachers (ENL, Special Education, ELA, Social Studies, Math, Science) will attend this conference and provide turn-key professional development. ITHS has a scheduled high quality PD every Monday for 90 minutes. Olga Sakhno, ENL coordinator will organize all-staff and departmental turn-key PD on multimodal literacy, student engagement, and project-based learning. Ms. Hyde, AP in charge of PD, keeps al agendas, handouts, attendance, etc. in her office. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: ITHS’s Title III program will provide ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a series of workshops, so that they can better understand the program and assist the children at home. As per Access-for-All initiative and our own experience with road-to-college for our students, we feel that helping parents navigate the complex process of choosing schools and figuring out the logistics of financial burden of American college education is a very important step in achieving high academic goals. In conjunction with Technology Department and Senior Adviser's Office, parent workshops will be offered on the following topics: • College Application Night & Is my Child Learning English? College application process, college requirements, tuition, travel costs, programs, college portfolio. Introduction to the ENL learning standards and NYSESLAT assessment, new parent orientation and ongoing parent outreach. Light refreshments will be served. Tentative date - September 27; time - 5p.m. - 8 p.m. Hosted by ENL coordinator (discussing assessments, data, answering individual questions) and College Advisory Office (application assistance, financial aid, individual questions) • FAFSA Night & Mid-School Year Orientation – March parent workshop for ENL parents. Financial aid workshop by college adviser's office will help the parents navigate the complexities of applying for financial aid. One of the major obstacles for low-income families is a way to pay for college. Our college advisory team recognizes the need to provide the parents with tools and information. Parents of the students who attend after-school and Saturday Programs will be updated on their child’s academic progress in ENL and content subject areas. We will discuss NYSESLAT ad REGENTS preparations that are going on in the school. Light refreshments will be served. Translations will be made available as per parent request. Tentative dates - mid December Hosts - ENL coordinator (discussion of mid-year progress, state assessments, after-school program) & College Adviser (FAFSA application assistance) Multilingual staff will be invited to attend to provide assistance in Spanish, Tagalog, Hindi(Tibetan), Russian, Arabic, Bangla, Haitian Creole, and French. Parents, as research indicates, are integral part of academic upbringing of a child. We believe that by bridging the school-home gap we can close the achievement gap. All records, agendas, minutes, and copies of handouts will be kept in ENL office - room 301D. Olga Sakhno, current ENL coordinator will be monitoring the records keeping. 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $122.33 hours x $60.65 (per session with fringe benefits) 2018 Language Series: October 27: Multiple Pathways to Learning in the Age of Accountability Six teachers - Fees: $195 Early Bird fee—through September 30, 2018 - total $1,170 Getting ready for the NYSESLAT Grade 9 - 12 Class Pack (30 Student Books & 1 Teacher's Manual) - two sets $598.95 each Barron's PSAT/NMSQT with CD-ROM, 16th Edition - 70 copies - $17.99 each n/a n/a Light refreshments for parents during College Application and FAFSA nights - $250 Miscellaneous promotional materials for parents - Metrocards for parent nights- $987 n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $7,419.60 $1,237 $2,457.20 n/a n/a $1,237 n/a 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Information Technology High School Borough Queens School Number 502 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joseph Reed Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Olga Sakhno Teacher/Subject Area Myrtho Noel/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Prakash Shrestha/ENL Related-Service Provider Natalia Bear - Speech Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Joe Attilio Coach N/A School Counselor Brenda Gargano Parent Mona-Lisa Chandler Parent Coordinator Emma Roman-Mendoza Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1032 Total number of ELLs 76 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.36% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: The ESL department of ITHS relies on the validity and integrity of NYSESLAT test administration. Thus, each year we analyze the spring results to determine levels for programming and basic modality analysis. Due to changes in levels and NYS mandates for delivering ESL/ENL instruction, we have changed the programming of the school ELL and former L population. As such, there are four sections of ELA for Ls and former Ls who scored Commanding, Expanding, or Transitioning on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT and two double period sections for Entering and Emerging Ells for 9-10 and 11-12 grades. ITHS ESL program used to be a Self-Contained model. Moving forward, two full-time TESOL certified teachers deliver ENL instruction within ELA content. The group sizes do not exceed the mandated guidelines. The length of time exceeds the mandates because of block 2018-19 CEP 54  scheduling. Thus, Entering & Emerging students receive 438 (an additional 78 minutes to the mandated time). Unfortunately, Transitioning and Expanding students will be missing an additional period of free-standing ENL instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? NYSESLAT is a state mandated assessment. We adhere to test administrator's manual. The three day testing period for listening, reading, and writing is an inconvenience in high school setting. It is increasingly difficult to maintain high attendance for the NYSESLAT given the current set up. We do our best to test the largest possible number of ELLs every year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: We consistently outscore the expected progress rate as indicated by AMAO. The ENL department collaborates with content teachers, guidance, school data team, administrators to make the needs of each struggling ESL student as salient and as pertinent as possible. Advanced Placement are predominantly attended by former Ls as is the graduation podium. Overall, the pace and rigor of our program prove to be a success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL team reviews last year's results as soon as they become available. We analyze overall results, trends, and individual student results. Early in September we conduct individual student conferences where we discuss progress, goals for the year, and hand out continued entitlement letters. We review classroom instructional units, modify ELA curriculum maps, and after-school tutoring to address academic and linguistic gaps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: The majority of ELLs this year is, as in previous years, 9-10 grade. Over half of the students are 9th graders and 50% of all ELLs are Expanding or Transitioning. Thus, instructional decisions are geared towards academic language acquisition and mainstream high school classroom transition. There are three 9th grade ELA/ENL sections for 2018-19 school year where students are engaged in a rigorous course that requires the learners to demonstrate their command of the conventions of standard English grammar and usage. They will produce well-structured and well developed coherent texts in writing. The texts will contain a theme and the theme will be supported by evidence derived from the classroom and out of the classroom sources. The evidence will be presented by using appropriate and varied transitions to establish links between sentences, ideas ,and concepts in the texts. Various forms of introductory and concluding paragraphs will be the basic features of such texts. Situation specific words and phrases will be another feature of such texts. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL department (with ELA and Sped. departments) conducts bi-monthly meetings on Mondays (90 minutes PD) to address instructional needs, modifications, data, etc. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 CEP 55  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: How is instruction delivered? a. ITHS ENL program is a Self-Contained model. Two full-time TESOL certified teachers deliver ESL instruction to a group of ELLs. The group sizes do not exceed the mandated guidelines. The length of time exceeds the mandates because of block scheduling. Thus, Entering and Emerging students receive 438 (an additional 78 minutes to the mandated time). b. Students are grouped by level and grade. For example, a class of Entering and Emerging students will have a section for 9-10 and one for 11-12. The work is differentiated along the lines of mainstream needs and ability. The students do not travel together but go on to mainstream classes scheduled according to their graduation requirements. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: The staff at ITHS, since the inception of our school, has been making sure that ELLs receive the appropriate amount of ESL instruction time. This year, more than ever, we are meeting and exceeding the mandated time allotted for ELL instruction. (See above) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: 3. Content Area Instruction – LEP students receive content area instruction in the mainstream classroom in English only. Free-stnding ESL uses a combination of balanced literacy and whole language approaches to help the kids in second langauge acquisition. However, content area teachers accommodate ELL population as follows: • Native Language Support – each content area classroom is equipped with study guides, glossaries, and vocabularies in many native languages. Each ELL student has a binder-sized Oxford Dictionary. • Testing Accommodations – students are given extended time, as well as, the opportunity to use the glossaries. • Professional Development – our department hosts a series of presentations throughout the year, covering the topics of language acquisition, learning to learn in a second language, classroom accommodations, scaffolding, and differentiation. • On-going ENL Department Support – ENL coordinator has compiled a substantial professional library that is readily available for the teachers’ perusal. Collaboration is ongoing. CCLS - ENL department coordinator provided PD for the content teachers regarding Common Core and ESL population. In it, we discussed the challenges of the CCLS for the language learners, such as textual analysis and making evidence-based claim. We provided concrete examples of what the Ls are able to do based on the theory of second language acquisition. What ARE they able to do? - 1. Cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text. a. Develop factual, interpretive, and evaluative questions for further exploration of the topic(s) 2. Analyze seminal U.S. documents of historical and literary significance (e.g., Washington’s Farewell Address, the Gettysburg Address, Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms speech, King’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail”), including how they address related themes and concepts. Some suggestion include: Guided reading questions, annotated texts, summarize, retell, use of new vocabulary Provide extensive historical context, allow use of published critical texts, support with other media (documentaries, posters, interviews, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 56  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: SIFE students (4) were identified immediately. ESL coordinator held conferences with guidance counselors. Transcripts were reviewed and areas of remediation were identified. As a result, the students who are not making sufficient progress on the NYSESLAT scores and/or those who are not meeting grade promotion criteria are offered tutoring, counseling, parental involvement. b. The greatest challenge for the Newcomers (0-3 years) remains the ELA Regents exam. The critical lens, listening, and reading essay examination is very difficult to pass for our ELLs. However, with the help of technology and both teachers, whose specialty is writing, we are hoping to have some students pass the exams. Strategies taught in ESL classroom that relate to ELA Regents: • Listening/Reading for information and understanding. • Note taking; finding textual support; fact/opinion based questions; • Writing for information, in response to literature, and persuasively. • Literary elements – figurative language, story elements, genres. • For 2018-19 school year we have a few newcomers c. 24 ELLs – 4-6 years of ENL service (historically, 25% of the total ELL population). • Specific areas of need – writing mechanics, essay structure, explicit grammar, new vocabulary acquisition, literary analysis. d. 39 Long-Term ELLs – (7+ years) • A third of the ELL student population. • Mostly, students with IEP whose language acquisition may be slowed due to learning/speech/language disabilities. • The level of frustration of the Long-Term ELLs is high. For many, English is the only language of communication that they know. However, we have had an intensive NYSESLAT prep in the past that showed that even the most frustrated long-term Ls can show proficiency by following the intensive test prep regimen we offer in the Spring. e. Students with special needs are serviced in accordance to their Individualized Education Plans. The ENL Department works closely with the Special Education coordinator and guidance counselors to comply with mandated services. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: A licensed TEOL pedagogue is teaching a self-contained class for ELL students with special needs. Mr. Shrestha specializes in scaffolded writing practice and reading workshop model that assist the students in language learning as well as academic content. In addition, Ms. Noel, Special Ed teacher of English, and Ms. Vitiello, Special Ed teacher, have completed graduate linguistics programs and completed their TESOL extension to better understand the process of language learning for the children with special needs. Each ELL-SWD classroom has a library of special resources such as leveled books, high interest/low reader fiction, non-fiction resources. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: A team that consists of an TESOL specialist, school psychologist, speech teacher, special education teacher, parents, and guidance counselor make collaborative decisions during the IEP meetings that reflect the best 2018-19 CEP 57  academic needs of the child. Decisions are individual. The ENL department makes written recommendations regarding the child's language acquisition status. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: 9. For 2018-19 school year our ENL program reflects the grade-specific language instruction. Ninth grade ENL instruction includes non-fiction readings to develop math literacy and scientific reasoning, grade appropriate fiction studies with emphasis on literary elements and reading comprehension. Special attention is paid to study skills development and mainstream classroom transition. 10th grade ENL classroom is geared towards Global Regents preparation. Reading non-fiction, primary sources, recognizing cause and effect in historical events, topics in geography and human habitat serve as academic scaffold for the 10th graders' mainstream transition into a Social Studies classroom. 11th & 12th grade ENL class is a writing workshop for ELA Regents prep and college-bound ELLs. Some topics and students' work includes argumentative writing, text analysis, and independent research projects. All recent former ELLs are identified by the ENL coordinator and are extended the same testing accommodations as current ELLs: extended time, native-language supports, use of glossaries, and after-school tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: In the past we have had our ELLs visit STEM expo, Microsoft; we introduced "Paths to secondary ed and careers" units of study. The students found a wealth of information regarding college and career readiness as well as different careers in science and technology. This year, we will continue expanding our students' college and career opportunities by partnering with College Adviser's office as well as Work-Base Coordinator. Collaborative workshops will include interview skills, resume writing, college nights for parents, etc. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: Any language learning program is effective if it has willing participants and ample time. Free-standing ESL has been eliminated for upper levels due to changes in NY State mandates. The effectiveness of such move is dubious and yet to be determined. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: Title III after-school and Saturday programs for ELLs as well as Regents prep sessions are being implemented for 2018-19 school year. Ample funding will allow for after-school tutoring four times a week as well as four hours of Saturday English Language Arts Academy. All recent former ELLs are identified by the ESL coordinator and are extended the same testing accommodations as current ELLs: extended time, native-language supports, use of glossaries, and after-school tutoring. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: New programs this year are the grade-specific and content area supporting ESL instruction. We have moved away from 100% second language acquisition towards mainstream classroom transition and college readiness. Some of instructional materials include: • Class sets of ESL and Oxford binder dictionaries. • Spanish-English dictionaries. • Classroom library (400+ titles) of contemporary, young adult, picture books, and classic adaptations. • Reference & media materials – magazines, encyclopedias, fact books. • McDougal Little Bridges to Literature and 9th grade Literature text books with instructional support materials. • Milestones A, B, C with teacher/student support materials, remediation software, and assessment packet. • Laptops, headphones, audio books, Internet access, LCD projector, Smartboard, TV/DVD Achieve 3000 yearly subscription 2018-19 CEP 58  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Native Language is supported by providing glossaries, on-line dictionaries and translations, Spanish titles in the classroom and the school libraries. Students are given the option of taking most of the Regents in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: The required services are age and level appropriate. Students are placed in the classes according to their ESL and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: New programs this year are the grade-specific and content area supporting ESL instruction. We have moved away from 100% second language acquisition towards mainstream classroom transition and college readiness. Some of instructional materials include: • Class sets of ESL and Oxford binder dictionaries. • Spanish-English dictionaries. • Classroom library (200+ titles) of contemporary, young adult, picture books, and classic adaptations. • Reference & media materials – magazines, encyclopedias, fact books. • McDougal Little Bridges to Literature and 9th grade Literature text books with instructional support materials. • Milestones A, B, C with teacher/student support materials, remediation software, and assessment packet. • Laptops, headphones, audio books, Internet access, LCD projector, Smartboard, TV/DVD Achieve 3000 yearly subscription 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: ESL Coordinator makes classroom visits to welcome the students and show the classroom library, glossaries, dictionaries, and provide support and encouragement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Professional Development in our school is essential as a large percentage of student body is either foreign born, ELL, former ELL, or bilingual. The ENL coordinator has set up a PD schedule that includes the following: 2018-19 CEP 59  • introduction to the mandates of the ENL program, eligibility, and testing • description of the ENL programs used in our school • a tour of ENL methodologies that work in content area with our students • evaluation of ENL students, including the periodic assessments, and the NYSESLAT. • learning with laptops in a wireless classroom environment • multimedia and ENL • differentiated instruction for ELLs in the Content Areas • the Workshop Model • PD will be ongoing, consistent, and sustained. • There will be three PD sessions (60 minutes each) organized each semester in the area of ENL methodologies for the entire school staff. Title III Professional Development program will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching ELL’s. It will also focus on how to prepare ELL’s to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops These professional development sessions will be facilitated by school administrators, ENL Coordinator and teachers. Teachers teaching ELL’s will receive 4 sessions of professional development. Topics that will be addressed during these professional development sessions are as follow: • One professional development sessions will be devoted to Scaffolding across the Disciplines: “Types of Scaffolding as Preparation for CCLS Alignment”. • One professional development session will be devoted to Differentiated Instructional Strategies: “Grouping by Deficiency to Achieve Proficiency”. • One professional development session will be devoted to the strategies needed to prepare ELL’s to meet the state standards and to gain a clear understanding of the NYSESLAT. “April Crunch” • One professional development session will be devoted to math and science instructional strategies to develop and enhance ESL students’ skills and performance on the city and state assessments: “Learning to Learn in a Second Language”. Paste response to question here: OELL provides various workshops throughout the year. ENL coordinator and AP of English collaborate on curriculum mapping and unit planning to develop ELL strategies in content classrooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: after-school tutoring, units of study that address acculturation and acclimation to the high school environment. Paste response to question here: In 2017-18 school year, ENL department provided four full PD sessions (90 minutes each) and one half (45 minutes) session for the staff. Topics include those mentioned above in the first question. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: ITHS’s Title III program will provide ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a series of workshops, so that they can better understand the program and assist the children at home. In conjunction with Technology Department, parent workshops will be offered on the following topics: • Is my Child Learning English? Introduction to the ESL learning standards and NYSESLAT assessment – October Orientation 2018-19 CEP 60  and ongoing parent outreach. • How can technology help us learn better? Instructional technology is helping students and families stay in touch with advancement of technological society. Local businesses, community organizations, and agencies that are school educational partners will offer services to the ESL students and their families: informative meetings, health services, internship opportunities, and free/low cost classes for parents of ESL students. The school will be available for the school community to use. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: Parents are always welcome at this school. There are amble opportunities for the parents to be involved here. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: Once this document is populated with current numbers (2018 NYSESLAT results, Regents scores, etc), we will have a signature page ready. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joseph E. Reed, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Information Technology High Sc School DBN: 30Q502 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joseph Reed Title Principal Joe Attilio Assistant Principal Emma Roman-Mendoza Parent Coordinator Olga Sakhno ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mona-Lisa Chandler Parent Myrtho Noel Teacher/Subject Area Prakash Shrestha Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Brenda Gargano School Counselor Elaine Lindsey N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Natalia Bear Other Speech Teacher N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 N/A N/A 6/22/18 6/22/18 N/A 6/22/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30 School Name: Q502 Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Emma Roman-Mendoza Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the RDGS, 58.7% of the students are of Hispanic origin. According to the RESI, 66.4% of students have a Home Language Code other than NO with 46% of students having a Home Language Code of SP. According to the RAPL, 54% of students have parents with spoken/written languages other than English. All communications with home are sent in English and Spanish. Additionally, there are a number of bilingual staff member available for translation services. Translation if available in Arabic, Tagalog, Hind/Nepali, Bengali, Chinese (Cantonese), Chinese (Mandarin), Korean, Russian, Ukrainian, French, Haitian Creole, Spanish, Greek, Hebrew. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE (ANY) Dutch ENGLISH EWE GUJARATI GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI KOREAN MANDARIN NEPALI PILIPINO (TAGALOG) PUNJABI POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN SPANISH TAMIL THAI TIBETAN URDU 1 13 72 32 1 1102 1 2 1 2 5 2 0 9 2 4 11 6 1 669 1 3 4 10 00.05 00.66 03.68 01.64 00.05 56.31 00.05 00.10 00.05 00.10 00.26 00.10 0 00.46 00.10 00.20 00.56 00.31 00.05 34.18 00.05 00.15 00.20 00.51 1 13 72 30 1 1112 1 2 1 0 5 2 2 9 2 4 11 6 1 660 2 3 4 10 00.05 00.66 03.68 01.53 00.05 56.82 00.05 00.10 00.05 0 00.26 00.10 00.10 00.46 00.10 00.20 00.56 00.31 00.05 33.73 00.10 00.15 00.20 00.51 2018-19 CEP 65  UKRAINIAN UZBEK 2 1 00.10 00.05 2 1 00.10 00.05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Handbook Parent Newsletter Field Trip Notifications Tutoring Notification SAT/PSAT Notification September Monthly Ongoing Ongoing March Parent-Teacher Conference Notification November/March Regents Prep Notification November/April Regents Exams Notification December/May/July We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel for non-covered languages when needed We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel for non-covered languages when needed We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel for non-covered languages when needed We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel for non-covered languages when needed 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PTA meetings Monthly September October CTE Orientation School Open House Parent Teacher Conference November/March Grade Level College Readiness meetings Over-the-phone Interpretation, in-person interpretation, School Staff. Robocalls and email blasts have automatic translation capability based on Home Language Code. FAFSA Night Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing JupiterGrades training PPTs IEP meetings Ongoing Ongoing Principal Suspension Hearings Ongoing Ongoing Guidance calls to parents Parent Coordinator calls with parents Ongoing Parental Contact by Teachers Parental Contact by College Advisor Ongoing Ongoing Robocalls to parents regarding upcoming events Robocalls to parents regarding student attendance Email blasts to parents regarding upcoming events Ongoing Over-the-phone Interpretation, in-person interpretation, School Staff. Robocalls and email blasts have automatic translation capability based on Home Language Code. Over-the-phone Interpretation, in-person interpretation, School Staff. Robocalls and email blasts have automatic translation capability based on Home Language Code. Over-the-phone Interpretation, in-person interpretation, School Staff. Robocalls and email blasts have automatic translation capability based on Home Language Code. 2018-19 CEP 67  Ongoing Ongoing 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Robocalls and email blasts have automatic translation capability based on Home Language Code. School phone system allows for selection of language for menu options. Staff members are available to translate for Spanish speaking parents as well as several other languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff are surveyed at beginning of school year regarding LOTE they speak. A list is generated and posted throughout the school. The Language Access Coordinator will turnkey training on language access to all staff members and will provide Language Line Information. Translation protocols will be included in staff handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signs are posted near the entrance to the main office indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services at the school. During parent teacher conference, all classroom teachers have the list of language translation availability through school staff and DOE vendors. Parent Coordinator distributes the Parents' Bill of Rights. Safety Plan contains procedures for ensuring parents have access to administrative staff. PTA meetings are translated in real time in Spanish Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Learning Environment survey. School will review feedback from survey and adjust plan accordingly. 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-19 CEP 69 
