2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q550 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR ARTS AND BUSINESS Principal: ANA R. ZAMBRANO-BURAKOV 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: High School for Arts and Business 342400011550 School Number (DBN): 24Q550 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 105-25 Horace Harding Expressway, Corona, NY 11368 Phone Number: 718-271-8383 Fax: 718-271-7196 School Contact Person: Jimmy Liu Email Address: jliu5@school.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ana-Zambrano-Burakov David Yam Maria Quiroz Michael Yarosz Mercedes Gordillo Aisha Jean Charles Britney Brito NA District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing N.Y. 11354 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-741-3157 Fax: 718-741-7098 Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 90-27 Sutphin Boulevard Executive Director’s Office Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  Lpendere@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ana Zambrano-Burakov David Yam Maria Quiroz Mercedes Gordillo Aisha JeanCharles Britney Brito Stephen Goodman Justin Green Michael Yarosz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ Staff/Chairperson 2018-19 CEP 5  Danet Munoz Rosa Davila Carmen Brito Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The High School for Arts and Business is committed to providing opportunities for our students to achieve excellence in academic, career, and technical pursuits. Our individualized programming helps students earn an Advanced Regents diploma and continue on to the college or career path of their choice. Through broad-based educational experiences, our students develop technological and artistic literacy using an interactive approach. Our culturally diverse school community features partnerships that support personal growth and emphasize global understanding, leadership and integrity. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our families experience serious socio-economic challenges that have a direct impact on student learning and emotional well-being. Because of the low income of the majority of our students, we are a Title I school-wide program. Our entire school community is aware of this need and contributes to provide the additional academic and social and emotional support to compensate for these deficiencies. In spite of all these obstacles, our school data demonstrates consistent increases in graduation rates and student attendance during the past consecutive eight years. This could not have been possible without a highly effective and dedicated school community. Out of 405 High Schools ranked, HSAB was ranked #21 by the US News and World Report, “New York’s Best High Schools". Our four year graduation rate has steadily increased: 2007-08 58%, 2008-09 66.3%, 2009-10 71%, 2010-11 79.6%, 2011-12 83.1%, 2012-13 83.1%, 2013-14 85.2%, 2014-15 90.4%,2015-16 90%, 2016-17 90%., 2017-2018 93%. The school has CTE programs that are designed to ensure that students have access to curricula and school to work opportunities that prepare them for careers. In the 2016-17 school year, our school has been recertified in Career and Technical Education by the New York State Educational Department for the next five years. Guidance counselors visit English classes and deliver presentations on the college application process. Presentations are geared toward specific grade levels. The college counselor plans and implements college nights for juniors and seniors. Teachers assist students with the college application process during the PTA meetings. CUNY representatives visit the school and also present to students and their families. Our mathematics department has been showcased by our network as a model department due to high results in Common Core Assessments in Algebra. We were identified by our network as having results in the top third of all of the schools in our network. Our students have won first place in the Washington Congressional Art Competition. Our paintings have been featured in the Capitol building in Washington DC and Congressman Joseph Crowely’s office among others. The prestigious O’Melveny and Myers law firm annually grants three of our students’ scholarships totaling $18,000. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are Title I School Wide Program with various social, economical and academic challenges. This leads to having to provide additional academic and guidance supports before and after school and on Saturdays. Parent workshops are offered during mornings and evenings to accommodate our families' work schedules. In addition, we have a high percentage of students who enter the 9th grade with low levels in Mathematics and Literacy. In order to address this issue we offer support classes to build a strong foundation during their first year in high school. In recent years, we have more students with disabilities coming to our school. We have hired additional staff to support their need as delineated in the IEP. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We believe that the elements in the framework where we have made the most progress last year is in the rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers. Our teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classroom and our school. As a result of teacher teams working together, the rigor of our instruction has increased as evidenced in our Regents pass rates and graduation rates. Our routine Measures of Student Learning and Teacher Practice workshop, along with our multi-year partnership with Generation Ready, has served to increase rigor and improve the quality of instruction. In order to further improve our instruction, we would like to focus on our Quality 2018-19 CEP 10  Review recommendations from this past school year which include multiple entry points, writing to learn, formative assessments and learning targets. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q550 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 812 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 1 4 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 4 8 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 67.5% % Reduced Lunch 9.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 76.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.1 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 95% 89.6% 33.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 105 112 13 91.2% 2.5% 16.7% 7.9% 8.6% 1.7% 8 27% 7 N/A N/A 97% 96% 93.2% 22% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing our curriculum, we have assessed that we need a focus on literacy across all 9th grade curriculum. According to our 2016 School Performance Dashboard, our average score for Common Core English Regents is 75%. This is an area of need since the comparison group is at 77% and the City is at 76%. On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.2: 1. Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. 2. Across classrooms, teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English and/or native language where appropriate, and routines) consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. 3. Across classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation. On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 2.2: 1. Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curricula, thus providing actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. 2. The school uses common assessments to determine student progress toward goals across grades and subject areas and the results are used to adjust curricula and instruction. 3. Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs. 2018-19 CEP 13  Strengths: 1. Students in algebra classes as well as English classes have shown steady progress with an uptrend since 2013. 2. During Inquiry groups, teachers have been working with placing literacy components into pacing calendars and in-house curriculum. 3. Teachers receive professional learning seminars where incorporating literacy across 9th grade curriculum have begun to be addressed. Weaknesses: 1. Unit plans have been created but lack a literacy component that reflects extended use of successful literary techniques. 2. Teachers have discovered during the inquiry process that student work does not reflect a high literacy component to make students college and career ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher teams will refine comprehensive unit plans to enhance literacy in 9th grade students across Earth Science, Global History, Geometry, and English. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Professional Development about literacy is offered to 9th grade teachers from the High School. All 9th grade teachers September 2018-June 2019 Borough Field Support Center , Assistant Principals 2. All 9th grade teachers will be versed on the pedagogical shifts demanded by the common core standards. 3. All 9th grade teachers will analyze the EngageNY.org website curriculum resources to aid in their lesson planning. 4. 9th grade teachers will use the EngageNY.org resources to mold curriculums that are suitable for our school. Teachers facilitate small group and individual tutoring during extended and regular school day hours. These will be differentiated as per our in house teacher made progress report, All students September 2018-June 2019 Parents of all students September 2018-June 2019 The Assistant Principals of content area subjects will give frequent presentations during the school year to the Parent Teacher Association regarding curriculum updates in mathematics. The math coach, who is bilingual in Spanish, will talk to parents about the changes that are occurring within the mathematics curriculum at open houses, parent teacher conferences, and outreach organizations within our community. The Assistant Principals will also closely update the parent coordinator with changes in the curriculum on a monthly basis. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly PTA, SLT and parent workshops, the academic staff presents topic on Rigorous Instruction, SAT and College requirements, Websites for families to assist their children with homework, new Regent Exams, graduation requirements and other topics of need. The Principal, Assistant Principal of Guidance, College Advisor and Parent coordinator will be responsible for the implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax-Levy: One coverage for Math AP class and two coverages for math coach classes. Tax-Levy: Circular Six Professional Periods Tax Levy and Title III: Per-Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 9th grade teachers will utilize mid- module assessments and formative assessments for every module 100% of the time to test for effectiveness within curriculum development as evidenced by an inspection of student work folders. By the end of February 2019, 9th grade teachers will incorporate literacy practices in their lesson plans 100% of the time linking common core standards within content areas as evidenced by the MOTP reports through ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use our Quality Review , School Survey, ADVANCE reports, School Quality Guide and School Quality Snapshot. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Every year, we celebrate Respect for All week, where we develop activities that support tolerance, respect and inclusion. In analyzing our discipline and guidance records and OORS data, we found that 46 of our students were suspended during the 2016-2017 school year. During our June 2017 safety meeting, we have determined that character curriculum will enhance the social responsibility of the students and have assessed the need to infuse these lessons throughout the curriculum and throughout the year. Character curriculum will support tolerance and acceptance for all groups including ethnic, religious and gender groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Social studies and English classes will incorporate character curriculum elements in the classroom. We will measure the goal by reviewing curriculum maps, lesson plans and completed student work. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in Respect for All professional development. Teachers and counselors will provide workshops for parents. All Teachers and parents 2. Teachers will use the resources provided in the Respect for All library. 3. The National Character Curriculum has elements that will be incorporated into Interdisciplinary Units of study for the Humanities. 4. Lessons for developing an increased awareness and tolerance for students in the LGBTQ community will be initiated by both English and Social Studies Teachers. SS and English Teachers SS and English Teachers All Students and Humanities Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We support our families beginning of June of the students eight grade by visiting the feeder schools, doing orientations and following a mock schedule with their children. We assess the needs of the families as per the DOE surveys and our in-house made surveys. Afterwards, we prepare monthly workshops conducted during the mornings and evenings to accommodate our familes work schedules. In addition, our parent coordinator and quidance counselors partner with local community business, and collect donations from staff members, to assist families in economic crisis. We Saturday ESL classes for parents and Metro Cards are provided. Parents also participate in Paint Night, Table Tennis Family Competions, Trips and other school events. Guest speakers are invited by the PTA to further assist the community with legal, health, post-secondary and other areas of need. Our families also participate in Family Fun Night, to promote healthy communication between parents teenagers. The academic team shares curriculum and techniques on how to help their children succeed academically. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are Jimmy Liu, Assistant Principal of Guidance and Karen Nguyen, Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  Teacher team meeting will take place on Wednesdays through the SBO vote. We will use Title 1 and Fair Student Funding to pay our participating teachers for the curriculum planning and development. SPARK consultant and School Safety outreach presenters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will review curriculum maps and lessons during Teacher Team meetings. In February 2019, teacher teams and administrators will review to see that each English and Social Studies teacher will have incorporated at least one Respect for All character lesson into the curriculum. Lessons will be shared in teacher teams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Quality Review , School Survey, ADVANCE reports, School Quality Guide and School Quality Snapshot Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing our PPO for the 2017-2018 school year, one of the recommendations included the following next step: 1. Ensure that teachers are trained to use the right protocols so that teacher teams engage in structured discussions that lead to improved teacher practices. An Adapted Consultancy Protocol for Examining Student Work may be better suited to analyze qualitative data from units and/or lessons that have already been implemented along with student work produced during the implementation period. 2. Provide professional learning sessions and/or coaching to teachers that supports their ability to present their lessons and student work in a meaningful way that promotes the learning of their colleagues on the team. Teachers need to be trained to select lessons and student work that can reveal issues around teaching and learning at the schools. 3. Administrators should sit in on team meetings as participant observers and debrief their observations with teachers to build their capacity to facilitate inquiry work. Strengths : The team engages in inquiry cycles every two months and rotates presenters. Presenters are thoroughly prepared and have a clear vision to student work products. Teachers who have attended workshops will turnkey to teacher teams and share techniques. Teachers will implement these new techniques into the curriculum. Weaknesses : The participants in the group should be given time to draw conclusions, ask probing questions, and offer strategies to improve teacher practice. Most importantly, the presenter should not function as the facilitator of the protocol as well. Another colleague should function as the facilitator, promoting equity of voice within the group. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 20  By June 2019, all teacher teams will engage in problems of practice using the consultancy protocol at least twice a month. Teacher walk-through and peer assessments will be used. This goal will be measured through Teacher Team minutes and peer observations. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will receive continuous training to adapt the Consultancy Protocol and learn techniques on helping sub-groups such as ENL and ISS students. Teachers 2. Teachers will meet during weekly by department in order to develop strategies and make changes to pacing calendars and curriculum in order to address identified literacy challenges. Teachers 3. Administrators will sit in on team meetings as participant observers and debrief their observations with teachers during inquiry work. All Assistant Principals September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 ELA teachers, Generation Ready Consultant, Assistant Principal of English Teachers, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal of English, ELA Teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our teachers, administrators and guidance counselors present during PTA meetings sharing techniques for parents to use with their children. These take place the third Thursday of every month. In addition, parents learn about our on-line program, PupilPath that allows them to monitor progress. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are Jimmy Liu, Assistant Principal of Guidance and Karen Nguyen, Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title III Per Session. Generation Ready Consultant Tax Levy Assistant Principal of English Language Arts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 22  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019 teachers will increase the coherence and rigor of assessment tasks that are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards as evidenced through a review of student work products in student work folders. We will utilize the Tri State Quality Review Rubric for Lessons and Units in order to assess progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Quality Review , School Survey, ADVANCE reports, School Quality Guide and School Quality Snapshot Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2018-2019 Principal Performance Observation recommendation, we will refine and build on this year’s instructional focus and PD around multiple entry points and teaching practices to ensure that teachers strategically provide multiple entry points so that lessons challenge all students in their learning and result in producing meaningful work products. The PPO identified key areas for improvement: Engage students in tasks that are rigorous and challenge students to think critically. Student centered learning Student access to rigorous tasks Next Steps identified in the PPO: Support growth in questioning and discussion Reflect a shared understanding of effective pedagogy Support teacher growth and development Create rigorous learning tasks that provide opportunities for all students to make their thinking visible On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 1.2: 1. Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. 2. Across classrooms, teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English and/or native language where appropriate, and routines) consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. 3. Across classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation. 2018-19 CEP 24  On the 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient score on indicator 2.2: 1. Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curricula, thus providing actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. 2. The school uses common assessments to determine student progress toward goals across grades and subject areas and the results are used to adjust curricula and instruction. 3. Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs. After reviewing the Advance School level MOTP summary for the 2016-2017 school year, we found that our school’s area of strength is growing and developing professionally. Our review also revealed that our areas of weakness are in the area of 3B: Using questioning and discussion techniques. Only 2% of our staff received a highly effective rating in this area. Only 3% of our staff got a highly effective in the area of 3C: Engaging Students in Learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all teachers will have participated in bimonthly professional development in order to incorporate effective assessment strategies (3D) in their planning and high levels of student engagement (3C). We will measure the progress of this goal via the ADVANCE observations. We will increase the number of effective ratings in the category of 3C and 3D by 10%. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in professional development via shortened schedule on Wednesdays. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 2. During Common Planning time, teacher teams will view instructional videos and analyze their low inference data using the Danielson rubric. 3. Professional Development will be conducted by teacher leaders and administrative support centered around the revision of lesson plans, critical friends conferences focused on questions. 4. Teachers will participate in peer observations in order to refine and strengthen teacher practice Multiple-entry point strategies specific to ELLs, SWDs, SIFE, and overaged-under credited students will be addressed during professional learning experiences. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will bring samples of student work to analyze with the instructional teacher team. Assistant Principal of Supervision in content areas, Teacher Leaders, Borough Field Support Center Achievement Coaches and Generation Ready Consultants Borough Field Support Center staff specialist in the areas of ELLs SWDs, and student support Parents are informed about MoTP updates through information sessions in School Leadership team meetings. Our Assistant Principals present MoTP requirements at PTA meetings and parent workshops. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, AP Supervision of Content Areas, parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly parent workshops, the administration shares with the parents the Advance Rubric used for teacher evaluations. Parents are given the opportunity to ask questions and understand the process. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are Jimmy Liu, Assistant Principal of Guidance and Karen Nguyen, Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy: Circular Six duties Tax Levy: SBO Professional Learning Time schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, teacher understanding of assessment and student engagement will be evaluated through observations, instructional artifacts and student performance. By the end of January 2019, administrators will differentiate learning opportunities for teachers performing at different levels of mastery as part of their next steps for teachers based on observations and post-observation conferences. We will measure this goal through the reports available on ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Quality Review , School Survey, ADVANCE reports, School Quality Guide and School Quality Snapshot. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength : 1. 93 % of both parents and teachers believe the teachers effectively outreach to parents according to both parents and teachers. 2. The teacher tool "Skedula" allows teachers to have viable conversations with parents via email as well as log contact outreach attempts. Parents have "Pupil Path" that allows parents to be informed regarding their child's progress. 3. Our Attendance Team meets bi-monthly to review attendance DATA and patterns. Our team then develops techniques on how to address the students attendance challenges. As a result of our efforts, the attendance continues to improve. During the 2015-16 we reached an all time high percentage of 92.60%. 4. Our Saturday Parent Institute allows our parents to receive instruction on various topic that help them improve their relationship with their teenager. Also, we have English/Citizenship classes and computer classes. 5. We are increasing our family involvement after school. We now have family paint nights, dances and family events. 6. Our Assistant Principals conduct Curriculum Nights for families or community members who are interested in learning about Common Core Assessments and changes to the curriculum. 7. During the 2016-17 school year, over 50% of our parents completed the DOE Parent Survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Weakness: According to the "N.Y.C. School Survey 2015-2016" report: 1. 67 percent of our parents stated that they never volunteered for a school event 2. 24 percent of our parents feel that we need stronger family-community ties. According to the 2014-2015 School Quality Guide, 59% of parents are involved in school which is 2% below the city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will promote the category of family and community engagement to a level of 80% as evidenced by the 2017-2018 school survey. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage parents and invite parents to volunteer time to support our school during class trips, fund-raising, and school-wide events such as art shows, concerts, dances, and multi-cultural events.. Parents, PTA, members of the community September 2018-June 2019 PTA executive board, Administration and Teachers Ensure that our teachers and parents communicate more often. Schedule academic walk-throughs where families will have an opportunity to sit in child's classes. Parents Saturday workshops for parents will be differentiated by needs. Non-profit organizations will be invited. Weekly workshops where parenting skills and academic curriculum will be reviewed. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents, PTA and members of the community Parents, PTA and member of the community September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders and Instructional cabinet PTA executive board, Parent Coordinator Administration and Teachers PTA executive board, Parent Coordinator, Administration and Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Plaza del Sol, Queens Community House, Councilman Crowley and Ferrera-Copeland, Edumakate, O'Melveny, New York Cares, Brooklyn Railroad Society, Groundwell, Center for Arts Education, Queens Museum, Oratorio Society at Carnegie Hall. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TItle I Parent Engagement Title III Parent Engagement Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 30  School Leadership Team PTA Executive Board Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review the events that were offered for parent and community engagement during the Fall semester. We will review attendance sheets, agendas and feedback forms to assess the level of parental engagement. We will conduct an in-house parent survey in order to measure our progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Quality Review , School Survey, ADVANCE reports, School Quality Guide and School Quality Snapshot. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Incoming 9 th grade student who scored at levels 1 or 2 on their 8 th grade ELA assessment/HS formative assessments. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the school day with additional support after school and on Saturdays. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students in double period ELA classes are given support through small group instruction. Students who have failed the New York State Regents Examination in ELA receive support through small group instruction. ELL students receive additional support in ELA one-to-one via computer based instruction. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. Incoming 9th grade students who scored at levels 1 or 2 on their 8th grade ELA Assessment receive an additional ELA period of instruction. During the second period, students are given support via strategies in vocabulary, writing and reading interventions. Teachers provide scaffolding and additional resources in order for students to make progress. Students who failed the New York State Regents Examination in ELA receive individualized tutoring based on their English Regents Item Analysis. Students receive additional support in ELA through Castle Learning and Method Test Prep. Students reading strategies. Specific emphasis is placed upon students’ abilities to determine importance in the texts that they read. Additional focus is 2018-19 CEP 32  Mathematics Students who have failed regents examinations in the area of Mathematics. given to test-taking strategies as well as student writing in response to specific prompts. Periodic assessment tools assist the teacher in gauging the progress being made by his/her students and students’ readiness to move onto higher levels of comprehension. The activities are tiered to reflect the various levels of student achievement that may exist in one class. The lessons are differentiated in terms of the various difficulty levels of the text including vocabulary presented. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered daily during a professional period by various teachers throughout the day. Summer School students are identified by their failure to meet course requirements. These students have the opportunity to recover credits and retake the ELA Regents in August. At-risk students are identified by the use of Cohort Data. Students receive additional classes in the respective disciplines of Integrated Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra2/Trigonometry after failing the NYS Regents Exam in any Our method of delivery is extensive. We offer small group instruction through teacher professional assignments (mostly one to one,) Saturday Regents tutoring classes Small group instruction is held during the day and Regents tutoring occurs on Saturdays. Our Peer Tutoring Program occurs 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Students who have failed regents examinations in the area of Science. one of these subjects. Our math inquiry group focuses on maximizing techniques to ensure success for all students in a collaborative fashion. Summer School – Students are identified by failure to meet course standards; there is an opportunity for students to make up credits; reduced student- teacher ratio enables small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs; afford identified students the opportunity to re-take Regents exams and the at-risk students identified by cohort data. Saturday Regents Tutoring Program Circular 6R Tutoring – delivered to individual students or groups of 6-10 students. Students are given a diagnostic assessment and Item Analysis is created. This leads to targeted tutoring, individualized, according to student data. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to individual students or groups of three to six students in need of extra help or assistance in the content/subject areas during the teacher’s professional period (small group) and peer tutoring in the student center (one-to-one.) during the day and after school. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered by the teacher during a professional assignment. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. Make-up Lab – is delivered through Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. Make-up Lab delivered during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies Student who have received a Level 1 or 2 on the 8 th grade ELA/ HS formative assessments according to Circular R. This service is offered during select periods of the day and is subject to programming constraints (teacher/student availability.) Make-up Lab – is delivered during the school day, one day per week for Living Environment and Chemistry courses. Extended Day – is delivered on a selected after-school schedule and includes a course of study in the Sciences via traditional and computer assisted instruction. For Students in Living Environment and Chemistry – students are given support via strategies in vocabulary, writing and reading interventions in the sciences to increase positive student outcomes on NYS science assessments. Students are given support through tutoring during professional periods (Circular 6 assignments.) Students are also given support through an academic intervention team and all students that are scheduled to receive standardized testing are given a personalized education plan. This plan allows whole group instruction. Living Environment Exam Prep – Students who have failed the New York State Regents Examination in Living Environment receive support through whole group and small group instruction. Extended Day – Delivered via whole group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Summer School – Delivered via whole group, small group and individualized instruction. Saturday Regents Tutoring Program for students in Living Environment and Chemistry – Delivered via whole group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring, purposeful grouping, pull out and push in models. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered to small groups of no more than 10 students. Living Environment Exam Prep – Services are provided during the school day with additional support after school and on Saturdays. Extended Day – Services are provided after the school day, Summer School – delivered during the day. Before the school day, during the school day, after school and on Saturdays. Circular 6R Tutoring is delivered during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 35  the student to set goals and benchmarks for themselves and receive skill and content development for the regents. Student progress is also assessed through formative, interim and summative assessments which enable educators to develop a prescriptive support plan for each individual student. Circular 6 Tutoring - Delivered to individual students or groups of three to six students in need of extra help or assistance in the content/subject areas during the teacher’s professional period according to Circular 6R. This service is offered during select periods of the day and is subject to programming constraints (teacher/student availability.) Students are supported with supplemental supports through the blended on-line learning experience. Students use APEX, AVENTA and other I- Team Programs along with in-class instruction for Global History and Geography, United States History & Government, Participation in Government and the 2018-19 CEP 36  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified the guidance department and teachers. Guidance Department – Services provided as whole group, small group and one-to-one. Guidance Department - Services provided are delivered during the school day. Principals of Economics. Guidance Department Coordination of after-school tutoring performed by various departments. Summer school referrals, daily attendance calls and Group Guidance lessons, Pupil Personnel Team, meetings, guidance conferences, parent/student conferences, teacher conferences, attendance meetings, dean’s referrals for guidance outreach, review and monitoring of cohort data, referrals of outside agencies, PM School Program, APEX/Aventa Credit Recovery Program, Student assemblies increased support services to specific target groups including Ells, Economically disadvantaged, Black, Hispanic and ISS. Use of ARIS to identify target groups and monitor and track data. School Psychologist, Social Worker, Related Service Providers, etc. Manage and complete Triennials including Educational Planning, Committee meetings with outreach to students, parents and staff. 2018-19 CEP 37  As needed, reopening, updating and evaluating student cases through the Annual Review Process. As needed, management of the MDR process and the creation of a Behavioral Intervention Plan for each student. Participation and consultation with PPT including general education guidance counselors, social workers and teaching staff. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 39 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. During student free periods, guidance counselors will check on students twice a week for updates on status and to provide resources. Family counseling sessions during weekdays and on Saturdays will take place to accommodate various schedules. Conduct career training workshops for parents. Invite community organizations to share resources with the families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school leaders actively engage in conversations with CUNY as well as private universities such as Hofstra and NYU. These partnerships take place during the school year where students are taking education courses, observe our classes and are also part of student teaching and the new State requirement “ICE” Program. This interaction helps us identify highly qualified candidates and recruit them for future positions. Some of these candidates are hired as Substitutes and others to permanent positions. We also identify vacancies in Open Market and conduct thorough interviews as well as classroom demonstrations where a team of administrators, teachers and students are able to observe and are able to provide feedback to the Principal regarding the candidates. All ATRs assigned to our school are interviewed when vacancies are available. We also review all teachers’ licenses and work with our Program Office so that they teach utilizing proper licenses. We provide professional development utilizing Title I funds as well as other ENL Bilingual grants. In order to support and continue to develop our highly qualified teachers, we provide individualized professional development utilizing services from Generation Ready Consultants. Our cabinet discusses strengths and weaknesses of teachers and creates a yearly PD plan designed to address areas of need Generation Ready Consultants provides support to teachers in the areas of alignment of common core standards, curriculum maps and development of teacher effectiveness and with the instructional expectations for the year. We are also currently working with our Borough Field Support Center and are training our administrators to utilize the Danielson rubric as a professional development and evaluation tool. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have MoSL training bi-monthly along with Circular 6 and modified scheduled meetings with staff and administration. We also have Danielson Training and instructional support plans through the network and Generation Ready Consultants. The Principal and Assistant Principals have attended several meetings with Queens North Borough Field Support Staff to enhance high quality instruction for all students and staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 41  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers use item analysis from state-wide examinations and use it to drive instructions and to make changes in curriculum. Teachers identify patterns in student performance and identify areas of strengths and weakness. Teachers participate in an inquiry process on a weekly basis where they develop formative and summative assessments. Teachers analyze the data and use the date to make decisions and modify instruction according to the needs identified in the analysis. At the beginning of the year, the MOSL team meets and collaboratively meets and examines recent state-wide assessments in order to make decisions about the use and selection of assessments. The principal has weekly meetings with teacher team leaders who are trained in available assessments and make recommendations. The instructional cabinet reviews the recommendations and implements next steps. Teachers receive ongoing Professional development by the Assistant Principal of the department and by outside consultants from Generation Ready (Title 1). The impact of the professional development is assessed by the teachers and concludes with Next Steps. The Next Steps form the basis for the next professional development session. 2018-19 CEP 42 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 389,181 0 12,366 0 4,615,038 X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5E 5A, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 43   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School of Arts and Business, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students High School of Arts and Business will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School of Arts and Business , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 47  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In the 2018-2019 school year, Title III instructional funds will be utilized to continue the HSAB Saturday Academy and after-school classes to supplement instruction. Our Saturday Academy, which will be conducted from November to May, consists of four bilingual/ENL classes in content areas for a maximum of 20 students per class, for fourteen 3-hour Saturday sessions (9:00 am-12:00 pm). Each will be taught by one teacher for a total of four teachers. Classes that are offered include Math, ELA, Living Environment, and Global History and Geography and the classes are geared toward students who have not passed or are in danger of not passing the State exams related to these subjects. Students who need additional support in ELA are divided into two groups: Entering/Emerging and Transitioning/Expanding. Students in the first group are provided with resources and support for their language acquisition and writing skills. Students in the latter group are provided with resources and support that they will need in order to acquire the skills necessary to be successful on the ELA exam. The HSAB ELL Saturday Academy is staffed by licensed teachers in ENL, math, social studies and living environment, with a preference given to the very same classroom teachers of these students. Preference is also given to teachers who have bilingual extensions in the content areas. Students will be place into two 1 1/2 hour sessions depending on the academic need. Our Saturday Academy is a key component of our Academic Intervention service program for ELLs. The core objective of the program is to provide ELLs with the skills necessary to achieve success on State examinations, at a rate on par with their English proficient peers. The After School Program will focus on college readiness skills for English. Students will meet twice a week and will target students who have not yet met the High School English requirement and have not passed the required Regents Exam . The classes have targeted approximately 15 students who meet this criteria for each of the subject areas and students will receive academic intervention in order to succeed in their deficiencies. There is one ENL certified teacher, who will offer the academic intervention for these students. There will be two groups categorized by content area. Our After School program will take place immediately after the students end their day (periods 9 and 10) and will meet twice a week. Sessions will be two hours long depending on student needs. Sessions will begin in November and conclude in June. The textbooks and materials for use in this ELL Saturday Academy and the After School Program focus on materials such as ENL workbooks from Perfection Learning, Global Studies and Living Environment materials from Prentice Hall and supplemental Spanish Language materials for the Integrated Algebra courses. Teachers involved also continue to participate in professional development. In order to support instruction in the classroom and our supplementary instructional programs (Saturday, After-School,) We also plan on using Castle Learning, an online program that will supplement the content areas, during their time in the Saturday Academy and After School Program. Our school will also purchase Method Test Prep (with grant funds) as a resource to help students with PSAT and SAT reading components and increased vocabulary. These materials will be supplementary to the materials used during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In order to supplement direct instruction teachers will enhance the curriculum through cultural activities. Teachers will take students to Ellis Island to enhance their "Identity: The Immigrant Experience" curriculum unit. Students already research a "virtual" online Ellis Island as part of this unit. Visiting the actual Ellis Island, will supplement this unit. In order to reinforce native language skills, students can attend a Repertorio Espanol theatre presentation that follows what they have read in class, either "La Casa de Bernarda Alba" or la "Gringa". In this way, students can explore the genre of theatre. As an alternative, ENL students can also explore the genre of theatre in English through the Manhattan Theatre Club or The American Place Theatre. Theatre experiences increases student understanding and helps students make interdisciplinary connections in the area of history and culture and provides students with multiple opportunities to critically think and write as they explore the theatre genre. Records such as student attendance and program notification will be placed in Title III binders located in the office of the ENL coordinator. Our needs for these programs were assessed by using the item analysis for the Regents examination of June 2017. 36.4% of our ENL population received a 65 or higher on the English Regents in comparison to 75.3% overall students receiving 65 or higher on the English Regents. In the 2018-2019 English academic intervention will focus on the Common Core skills needed to excel in these exams. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers will receive professional development that will help them to support students language development. This year, our workshops for teachers will continue focus on the Common Core Standards and creating units and lessons that will allow students to access the material through multiple points of entry. Teachers will also create various types of assessments in order to identify the gaps and to scaffold and help students to reach success on the Common Core standards. Teachers will also create protocols for measuring growth. ENL and Content Area bilingual teachers (4 in total, 2 ENL, 1 Math, 1 Science) will attend 3 one hour professional development sessions after school. Our school uses Title 1 funds for our Professional Development which include workshops and one on one professional development with our Generation Ready consultant. (Our Generation Ready consultant is scheduled to have 10 days with teachers school wide this year paid by Title 1). The Generation Ready consultant will be focusing on Measures of Teacher Practice and Measures of Student Learning. We will use Title III funds for per-session so that teachers may attend the III one hour workshops after school. These workshops will supplement the Inquiry/Professional work that teachers are engaged in weekly. The titles of the these workshops include: (1) Providing meaningful feedback for ELL students (2)Creating products that include student voice (3) Supporting students in ENL classes in self and peer assessment. Teachers will also develop successful strategies for working together and developing resources to better support students in Integrated ENL classes. These workshops will supplements the Teacher Team meetings that teachers participate in on Wednesdays where ENL teachers discuss academic challenges related to the ENL 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development population. This will also supplement outside Professional Development provided by the office of ELLs and other organizations. Attendance sheets and agendas will be maintained in binders located in the office of the ENL coordinator. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In the 2018-19 school year, our parents will be involved through TITLE III through our Saturday ENL Academy for parents. This is an ongoing class in which topics will include: citizenship skills, supporting parents in order to obtain English proficiency and Technology skills. Workshops on the use of technology will include word processing with a focus on resume writing and e-mail. Parent orientation topics such as: Preparing your child for the college process will also be conducted in these classes. Topics for the classes are suggested by the students in the class as well as suggestions from the School Leadership Team. Classes will meet for three hours on Saturdays for a total of twelve sessions. Classes will begin in December and will conclude in June. Our parent classes will be conducted by our ENL licensed teacher/LAB Besis coordinator,Ms. Claudia Feltenstein and our Spanish teacher Ms. Christina Stoyanoff. Our parent coordinator, Ms. Karen Nguyen will also offer workshops that will focus on assisting parents in helping their children succeed in High School and College. This year, the workshops will gear around College and Career Readiness, College Awareness, Financial Aid and college information for DACA and undocumented students. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name High School for Arts and Business Borough Queens School Number 550 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ana Zambrano-Burakov Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Claudia Feltenstein Teacher/Subject Area Claudia Velarde Teacher/Subject Area William Renteria Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Evelyn Acosta Coach type here School Counselor Marina Reynoso Parent Maria Quiroz Parent Coordinator Ms. Karen Nguyen Field Support Center Staff Member Doshka Truick Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 837 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 79 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.44%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 16-17 K 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 3 10 11 12 4 1 1 0 0 0 0 3 4 1 1 Tot # 9 0 0 0 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To determine literacy skills, we use the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exam. If students came from a middle school we also obtain ELA scores. The 8th grades ELA scores provides insight in the gaps that students still have. When looking at the NYSESLAT, we look at the breakdown of scores in order to determine areas of weakness by modality. We share these with teachers together with professional development on how to scaffold the weakness in the modalities revealed in the NYSESLAT. Teachers then modify lessons accordingly. For students in the 11th and 12th grade, teachers look at the ELA Regents exam item analysis in order to provide support. Teachers also do their own formative assessments modeled after the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents exam at the beginning of the school year to identify strengths and weaknesses in students. These results are shared during Inquiry meetings. In analyzing the 2017 JUNE ELA administration item analysis, we noticed that there was a decrease in ELL students passing as compared to the 2016 administration. We also analyzed the NYSESLAT exam and noticed that 53 students remained at the same level. We will use this data to provide targeted intervention for students. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In the beginning of the school year, ELL NYSESLAT and ELA data is distributed to teachers. Teachers meet once a week during inquiry sessions, using the Consultancy Protocol and analyze the results of the exams and problems of practice. Teachers report their findings and update the modifications to our curriculum "Go To" maps. Teacher teams also provided targeted instruction for students who are not progressing on the NYSESLAT or have not passed the ELA regents. During the school year, teachers continuously meet as new information is available such a progress reports, report cards grades, PUPIL PATH entries, results from in-house assessments and year after the January Regents administration. Student progress is tracked throughout the year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs using cohort data, graduation trackers, item analysis on Regents exams, credit accumulation data and attendance data. Our ENL program has been successful as evidenced in the progress made on student regents exams, credit accumulation and graduation rate of our ELLs. Because we are constantly reviewing and evaluating the effectiveness of our programs, we have been successful in moving our ELLs forward and supporting them as they make progress. According to our state measures, we have met AYP for the past several years including for our sub-group of ELLs. In the 2017-2018 school year, we are looking to target our 11th and 12th grade ELL students who have not passed the ELA Regents. (12 students). As we have discovered by looking at the data, we have a significant number of 11th and 12th graders who have passed the ELA regents but have not achieved a 75 (College Readiness Standard) (36 students). We would like to continue to provide intervention so that ELL students can meet the College Readiness standard. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered, classroom teachers are given the data in order to set goals and individualize instruction. Teachers share information during Teacher Team meetings and department conferences. Curriculum modifications are made in the Pacing calendars,/Unit plans as a result of teacher team meetings. Interventions, such as tutoring and guidance services are also provided for students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers will look at the EDAT, NYSESLAT and ELA scores in order to determine students that are at risk. Once these students are identified, targeted intervention will occur. Students will be given targeted instruction in classes as well as supplemental instruction in our ELA/ENL academy after school on Tuesdays and Thursdays and on Saturdays. Meetings will be schedule with the Assistant Principal and the Guidance counselor in order to address the needs of the student and create a plan to reach the requirements for graduation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In reviewing our NYSESLAT 2017 data, the data shows that we have in our 9th grade, 43 Expanding, 6 Transitioning, 0 Emerging and 0 Entering. In the 10th grade, we have 17 Expanding, 6 Transitioning, 0 Emerging and 0 Entering. In the 11th grade, 1 Expanding, 2 Transitioning, 0 Emerging and 0 Entering. In the 12th grade, 3 Expanding, 0 Transitioning, 0 Emerging and 0 Entering. We found that although 82% our ELLs are Expanding, 100% of our total ELLs need more support in Writing. Because we have found that writing is the weakest skill according to our trends analysis, we cover all the modalities but make a greater push toward writing. In our ELA regents results from the 2016-2017 school year, we found that ELLS (36 students) have not met College Readiness standards (75 on the ELA Regents). We are going to target these students and provide intervention through our after school tutoring program. Our efforts with English Language Learners within Algebra I common core exams have shown dramatic improvements from the 2013-2014 school year to the most recent administration of Algebra I during June 2017. Our ELL population in 2013-2014 passed the Algebra I exam with a rate of 25%. Our last administration from June 2017 in Algebra I has shown an increase for 2018-19 CEP 59  ELL population students to a level of 51.11%. This is a percentage increase of 104.4% over a three year range. This increase in ELL scores has been attributed to better teacher training for teachers teaching ELL's. There is ample room for improvement as short-term goals for ELL's within Algebra I has been set to 60% overall passing for this upcoming June 2018 administration. Increased learning opportunities for ELL's during Saturday tutoring and after-school tutoring have been planned for the 2017-2018 school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings are disseminated during Faculty meeting and Department conference which take place once a month. Teacher Team meetings take place weekly. ELL topics are discussed during the Chancellor's Professional Development days in September, November, February and June. The dissemination of findings is accompanied by a professional discussion about "Best Practices for ELLS". In addition ELL information is disseminated to the Language Allocation Policy team who in turn disseminates the information to their constituencies. Title III LEP programs are also discussed with the School Leadership Team. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Under Part 154, entering students will receive 1 ENL standalone period, 1 period of ENL/ELA with a dually licensed English teacher or ENL teacher pushing in everyday. Students will also receive one period of Integrated ENL and a content area. This year we, do not have any entering students but in the past we have had an ENL teacher push into Geometry. All students will be programmed keeping them on grade level with their peers. Emerging students will receive 1 ENL standalone period, 1 period of ENL with a dually licensed English and ENL teacher or a a Push in ENL teacher. Transitioning students will be placed in an Integrated English class on grade level with their cohort. That class will be taught by a dually licensed English/ENL teacher or it will be integrated with one English teacher and one ENL teacher. Expanding students will be be placed in an on grade level English class with their cohort. That class will be taught by a dually licensed English/ENL teacher or it will be integrated with one English teacher and one ENL teacher. Commanding students will receive integrated instructional (ENL/ELA or content area) every day in the content area that we identify as having the greatest need based on June 2017 Regents test data. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual students are placed in bilingual classes based on grade level and content area. Students in classes may have mixed proficiency levels. Students receive TBE in Global Studies and in Science. Students are grouped based on grade level. Scaffolding and multiple points of entry are used to assist students in accessing the content. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in our ENL classes exceed the number of minutes required in ENL and ELA as they are programmed to receive ENL instruction daily. 1 Period is equal to 45 minutes. Students receive additional HLA support for 45 minutes per day as 2018-19 CEP 60  stipulated in CR-PART 154. Entering students receive one period of Standalone ENL and 1 period of ENL/ELA and one period of ENL/Content area (Total number of minute approximately 660 minutes). Emerging students receive 1 period of Standalone ENL and 1 period of ENL/ELA (440 minutes). Transitioning students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA (220 minutes). Expanding students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA (220 minutes) and Commanding students receive 1 period of ENL/ELA (220 minutes). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our bilingual program in the content area consists of bilingual classes in science and social studies. Instruction is delivered as follows: for entering students, 60% native language and 40% English, for transitioning students, 50% native language and 50% English, for expanding students 60% English and 40% native language, with the English increasing throughout the semester. Supplementary materials such as workbooks, glossaries, maps and other types of scaffolding are provided for the students. ENL and bilingual content teachers conference in order to identify successful strategies for students. ENL teachers provide additional support in the classroom through vocabulary building in the content areas and through the use non-fiction readings. These methods are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards as they address the need for non-information texts. Bilingual content area teachers receive ongoing support and guidance to successfully integrate bilingual/ENL strategies into their lessons, moving students toward proficiency in the target language. At the beginning of each term, classroom teachers review NYSESLAT results and design instruction according to language needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During the admissions and articulation process, students are given a placement exam. They are then interviewed by Ms. Chacon, our lead Spanish Teacher. After students are assess, they are placed at the correct level of Home Language Arts. Home Language Arts teachers use the ELE and the Spanish LOTE in order to appropriately evaluate students in their native language throughout the year. Formative and Summative assessments by the classroom teacher are also utilized. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. In order to service the SIFE population, we have a plan in place to promote a challenging, rigorous, culturally relevant and linguistically sensitive educational program for these students. Our SIFE students, once identified, will be assessed through a uniform diagnostic test to identify their literacy and academic needs. We would assess these students using the ELL Periodic Assessments, which will assess their literacy and math levels. It also identifies areas of weakness that can be addressed. SIFE students will be placed in the appropriate level sequence to allow these students to have more time on task in the development of their language skills. In addition, any available data on the performance of these students on NYS Regents examinations and NYSESLAT will serve to target areas in need of improvement and be used for instructional planning. NYSESLAT results are reviewed by the ENL coordinator and A.P. of ENL when the scores are released in the fall. Students’ programs will be revised to meet the NYS C.R. 154 mandated number of units of instructional support for ELLs based on their NYSESLAT scores and parental selection. In addition, data is shared with the bilingual content area teacher and our entire staff via faculty and department conferences so that teachers could more effectively support these students in their classrooms. B. Newcomers are carefully assessed and placed according to our admissions policy into appropriate levels of ENL taught by licensed ENL teachers. Newcomers who are placed in beginner classes receive the requisite minutes of instruction per day and support from professionals who understand their need for visual and kinesthetic approaches in a communication-based classroom. Differentiation for students will include adapted texts in addition to the regular classroom texts, bilingual glossaries, visual aids, graphic organizers, translations and more time on task. C. ELLs who require more than four years to graduate receive special attention from our guidance counselors, LAB/BESIS coordinator and Assistant Principals who work collaboratively together to create an individualized plan of action in order to 2018-19 CEP 61  assist students in credit accumulation and passing the Regents exams required to graduate. These students are placed in Regents Review classes as well as our Saturday Academy. Required services and support will correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. In the classroom, teachers will work with intervention programs such as small group tutoring in order to help students progress. Differentiation for students will include adapted texts in addition to the regular classroom texts, glossaries, visual aids, graphic organizers, translations and more time on task. D. Once long-term ELLs are identified , these students are supported both academically and socially in an effort to help them transition into the mainstream. Teachers integrate NYSESLAT preparation into regular instruction, and our course of study for advanced ENL students includes challenging material and activities across all four language modalities. In addition, students who have failed the Regents examination are placed into literature-based Regents Intervention classes and registered for Saturday Academy, attendance at which is factored into final grades. Our ELLs who receive special education services and our holdovers benefit from Saturday Academy through more time on task and support in completing their class assignments. Our Regents review classes are structured according to the skills tested on the ELA Regents and, therefore, the instructional planning places listening, reading and writing at the forefront of the curriculum. Finally, students have the opportunity to participate in co-curricular and extra-curricular activities, such as the Repertorio Español and trips to the theater to experience performances in English and Spanish. This important component in the curriculum provides students a social context in which to improve their skills in authentic language settings. Moreover, our ENL teachers communicate regularly with our resource room and CTT teachers about individual student progress and use technology such as Google Classroom, Castle Learning , Kahn Academy, Quizlet.com and Pupil Path. Differentiation for students will include adapted texts in addition to the regular classroom texts, glossaries, visual aids, graphic organizers, translations and more time on task. E. Former ELLs are invited to continue to participate in the same activities that they were a part of while ESL students. These include, Saturday and After-School Academic intervention, trips to Repertorio Espanol and College For Every Student activities. In addition, test accommodation are provided for former ELLs for two years after they test out. As per CR-Part 154.2 students will also receive mandated services. Former ELLs (Commanding) receive 1 period of ESL/ENL per day. These students also receive testing accommodations as well. Differentiation for students will include adapted texts in addition to the regular classroom texts, glossaries, visual aids, graphic organizers, translations and more time on task. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize scaffolding strategies such as graphic organizers, resources such as supplemental texts, adapted texts, study guides, gallery walks and multi-sensory experiences. Students in these classrooms work collaboratively with their peers. Teachers group and regroup as needed. One strategy is to have to have student who have achieved the 75 on the ELA with students who have not in order to provide peer support. Teachers are also aware of students' IEP goals in order to help them develop a plan for achieving this goal. Teachers use materials that emphasize vocabulary in order to accelerate English Language acquisition. Our ENL coordinator, Claudia Feltenstein and Assistant Principal of ENL, Evelyn Acosta meet regularly with our IEP coordinator,Tuba Celebi in order to ensure that Special Education ELL students are receiving programs that contain the appropriate services required by their IEP and are in compliance with CR-Part 154. Student's IEP's are regularly reviewed and parties are notified of any changes in the IEP that may affect the program of the student. Decisions that affect Special Education ELLs are done collaboratively with the team and the Principal to make sure that their needs are met. If the IEP mandates bilingual instruction then the team will work together to ensure correct placement. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELLs collaborate with Special Education teachers in order to provide students with support in their classes. In addition, teachers are aware of IEP modifications and implement them in the classroom using differentiated support. ELLs are placed in CTT content area classes if so indicated by the IEP. ELL students, whether in Integrated or CTT classes, follow the Common Core curriculum in both ELA and Math but with additional supports. Additional supports may included, adapted texts, more time on task, graphic organizer and vocabulary supports. All of our pacing calendars include differentiated tasks and assignments for ENL students, Special Education students and students who receive both services. Twice a year, teachers update and revise plans. 2018-19 CEP 62  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the item analysis for Regents exams and interim assessments, Title III LEP funds will be utilized to continue the HSAB Saturday Academy and after-school tutoring. Our Academy, which will be conducted from October to June, consists of four bilingual classes for a maximum of 20 students per class, for fifteen 4-hour Saturday sessions (9:00-12:00). Classes that are offered include ENL and bilingual Math, Earth Science, Living Environment, Global History and Geography, and American History. The classes are geared toward students who have not passed or are in danger of not passing the State exams related to these subjects. The HSAB ELL Saturday Academy is staffed by licensed teachers in ENL, math, social studies and science, with a preference given to the very same classroom teachers of these students. English Language Learners who are programmed for Regents review classes are automatically registered for Saturday Academy, where they can improve their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Through the use of Title III LEP funds, we will be able to offer after-school instructional sessions two to three times per week for a session of up to two hours. The immediate impact of this tutorial program on students and the extensive time it provides to model testing accommodations in their real time frame makes our ELL Saturday Academy a key component of our AIS program for ELLs. The core objective of the program is to provide ELLs with the skills necessary to achieve a 65 or better on these examinations, at a rate on par with their English proficient peers. In our interventions, we utilize and reinforce the native language in order to help students build literacy in the target language as well as offer additional support in the Native Language classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based our 2016-17 data, 68% of our students enroll in college and career programs. In order to increase the number of ELLs attending college we will be writing the College Readiness Grant. Our goal is to partner with community based organizations such as College For Every Student which will support our students in understanding the College process, research and visit colleges and prepare for PSAT and SAT. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not closed our bilingual program, but in the 2017-2018 school year we only have 9 students who have requested the program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are awarded equal access to all programs as they are given the opportunity to take electives in our Business, Art and music sequences. ELLs are also given the opportunity to participate in AP Spanish Language and Literature. ELLs participate in various school trips and after school activities, such as sports and clubs. Supplemental services for ELLs include the Student Center, which takes place after school and the Saturday Academy. ELLs also participate in the College Awareness program that allows students to participate in service, mentoring activities, college trips and leadership and mentoring summits. Currently we have partnerships with Repertorio Espanol and the Manhattan Theatre Club that ELLs participate in which allow students to work with resident artists and their own teachers in analyzing the genre of drama and writing their own scenes and plays. Students also have the opportunity to see works of drama at these theatres. In reviewing attendance at these events described above, we have determined that ELLs do fully participate in these school programs. Our students also participate in the ELL support program at Queens College given on Saturdays. ELL students are also invited and participate in the College Now Program that we run in partnership with LaGuardia Community College. Students in that program have an opportunity to take college level courses while still in High School. We are triple session school, general education students take classes within one session. ELLs are permitted to take classes across all sessions in order to participate in classes such as Art, Music , Business or Advanced Placement. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Differentiation for students will include adapted texts in addition to the regular classroom texts, glossaries, annotation strategies, visual aids, graphic organizers, translations and more time on task. ENL students are given the opportunity to 2018-19 CEP 63  simultaneously learn English and computer skills such as PowerPoint, Google classroom, which allows students to share and revise work, Research and Blogging. These skills are necessary to support the new Common Core Aligned curriculum. Students use QUIZLET.com which is an online vocabulary program where students can practice vocabulary that is specifically used in a particular class. This year, we will continue to use Castle Learning, a program that allows for teachers to create assessments with Common Core aligned questions. The program then provides teachers with feedback to help them to differentiate instruction. In the Native language classes, teachers will provide students with authentic novels and literature in order to support the native language. ENL students who have shown great progress in their English proficiency will also have the opportunity to participate in the New York State Biliteracy Seal program that allows students to complete a process that will ultimately end in a Bilingual endorsement on their High School diploma recognized by the State New York. We continue this program during the 2017-2018 School year. All teachers and students in our school, including ELLs use PupilPath to monitor their progress. Teachers also use this program to communicate with students, for example, teachers will post assignments and classroom power points so that students may have access to study from these at anytime. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In addition to receiving ENL services, our ELLs receive challenging, rigorous academic instruction in their native language. Students in Home Language Arts Spanish classes sit for the Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Composition exam in their third year as well as the Advanced Placement in Spanish Literature and Composition exam in their fourth year. It is our belief, and research shows, that challenging students in their native language will strengthen their second language as well. Our ELLs are very successful on these exams. As this is usually the first Advanced Placement course that they take in our school, we find that their success motivates them to take other AP classes. This allows them to have a college experience while still in High School. We have also found that because students are analyzing literature in their Home Language Arts class, they can transfer the skills and many of the terms to their English Literature classes. This strengthens students’ academic learning in both the native class and English class. Material in the native language include the use of authentic novels and literature. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In providing services for our students, we factor both age and grade level in order to provide both classes and instructional materials that are appropriate for their age, grade and needs. Students follow the same curriculum as their peers. For example 9th grade ELA students follow the ENGAGE NY Common Core Curriculum. Students follow the curriculum with the proper scaffolding and support. Supports may include adaptations of novels in our English curriculum for Entering and Emerging ENL students in addition to the original text. When available, students may also get the translated version of the literature. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year, we provide a Parent and Student Orientation. Parents are given the opportunity to learn about the services available to their children for both ENL/Bilingual programs and school wide programs. The student orientations centered around providing students with information about programs and activities available to them at our school. It also includes workshops given by teachers on goal setting and strategies for success. Orientations are typically given by Claudia Feltenstein, ENL Coordinator, Maria Chacon HLA teacher and Evelyn Acosta, Assistant Principal of English, ENL and Foreign Language. Both parents and students are introduced to school personnel and given a school tour. Students are invited to the Title III Summer program at Newtown High School our assigned summer host site. We assist students with applications for Summer Programs at Queens College and LaGuardia Community College. During the Spring, ELLs participate in the Spring Academy that takes place during the Spring Break. The purpose of the Spring Academy is to provide intensive academy in Core Curriculum classes as well as helping students who fall behind to receive individualized attention and targeted tutoring. 2018-19 CEP 64  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Since the majority of our ELLs speak Spanish, ELLs whose native language is Spanish are given support through our Home Language Arts Program which include electives in our Spanish AP. Other ELLs may take electives in our Foreign Language Program where we offer Spanish, Italian and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is embedded into our school culture and philosophy. Because we have many ELLs and former ELLs , we find that it is important for our entire staff to participate in training that will help to support ELLs. Our staff including teachers and assistant principals have participated in workshops offered by our Office of English Language Learners and several other workshops that support Home Language Arts and content area instruction. In addition, our ENL, Bilingual and content area teachers of ELLs have attended workshops sponsored by NYS/NYC Bilingual Resource Network at Fordham University including workshops that focus on Regents Preparation for ELLs. Our Queens North Field Support Center also continues to provide our school with whole group or one on one Professional Development opportunities via our Support Specialist. Our Assistant Principal of ENL, together with our LAB/BESIS coordinator provide teachers and staff that includes paraprofessionals, psychologist, secretaries, parent coordinators with workshops in utilizing data such as NYSESLAT reports in order to implement ENL methodology, analyzing student data, review of parental options and Title III services. Secretaries, paraprofessionals and parent coordinator receive training by the Assistant Principal in their role in the process of identification and compliance letters so that they have a better understanding of how to assist the ENL coordinator as she performs these functions. All staff is given training on CR-Part 154.2 requirements. Additionally, Inquiry Teams, departmental and faculty conferences provide an opportunity for teachers to learn together and try new strategies to ensure the progress of our ELLs. Our Generation Ready consultant, Dale Worsely also works with teachers in providing literacy strategies that will help struggling students. These activities include reviewing the Common Core materials from ENGAGE NY and writing units that include scaffolding and support for ENL students. Teachers will write units, implement and revise during the year. They will use summative and formative assessments to determine the success of their units. In the 2017-18 school year Mr. Worsely will focus on training teachers to provide targeted feedback based on students' NYSESLAT designation and academic need. We will continue to train all of our teachers in ELL professional development during PD days which occur in September, November, January and June. This includes CR-PART 154 requirements, appropriate resources for classroom, testing accommodations in addition to other topics described above. Guidance counselors receive training on CR-PART 154.2 requirements and transitional placement from Assistant Principal of ENL, Evelyn Acosta and Assistant Principal of Guidance in order to help ENL students transition from the middle school to the high school. In addition, guidance counselors receive PD on appropriate resources for ELL students, accommodations and protocols for placement for Special Education ELL students. Records for Professional Development are maintained in the Title III binder. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers will receive training in order to meet the 50%/15% PD minimum. Teachers of ELLs are provided with PD at our weekly inquiry common teacher team meetings. With the new ENL/ELL model, teachers evaluate and modify curriculum during this time as well as provided outreach to selected students that the team has identified. Teachers focus on specific pedagogical strategies and learn how to provide multiple points of entry for sub-groups including ELLs. These activities support delivery of Common Core instruction because it gives teachers the opportunity to reflect on how ELLs learn and how they are providing ELLs with access to meaningful, engaging and cognitively challenging content. In addition, teachers attend MOSL PDs that are provided by our Generation Ready Consultant, Dale Worsely. Teachers are also offered ELL PD during faculty conferences and Professional Development Days. Teachers also attend PD offered by the office of ELLS such as the Bilingual Symposium. Transitional protocols are provided during ELL PDs. Student demographic data as well as NYSESLAT data is provided to teachers so that they can properly modify instruction for their ELLs. Teachers of ELLs are provided with PD at our weekly inquiry common teacher team meetings. Teachers evaluate and modify curriculum during this time as well as provide outreach to selected students that the team has identified. In addition, students attend MOSL PDs that are provided by our Generation Ready Consultant, Dale Worsely. Teachers are also offered ELL PD during faculty conferences and Professional Development Days. Teachers also attend PD offered by the office of ELLS such as the Bilingual Symposium. Records are maintained by the Principal's secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent of ELLs will be invited to meet with their child's teachers by scheduled appointments. These will take place from 4-6PM prior to PTA meetings during the months of November, February and April. Teachers will have student progress report and sample students work in order to have a meaningful academic conversation with the parent. In addition, they will receive resources to help their child at home and contribute to their academic growth and language development. All parents, including parents of ELLs take part in our Parent Orientation conducted in June. During this orientation, parents are given valuable information that will help their children transition from the middle school to the high school. During that same orientation, a workshop is offered specifically for ELL parents where parent options are discussed and parents have an opportunity to ask questions. Translation is provided. We involve parents in the effort to help ENL and bilingual students meet graduation requirements by providing translated materials on the New State Standards and Graduation Requirements and by holding an orientation for the parents of newly-arrived ELLs as described above. Orientation is ongoing throughout the fall and spring semesters to apprise incoming parents and students of the regulations. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual in Spanish and English and works closely with the administrative and instructional teams. One of her primary goals is to formulate, translate and disseminate informational materials to our Spanish-speaking parents. These initiatives, together with a series of workshops (including gang awareness, financial aid for college, graduation requirements and parenting skills) have helped create a community of adults whose primary concern is the academic, social and emotional health of English Language Learners. As part of Title III funds, parents also participate in the ENL Saturday class. During these classes, parents work with teachers to receive instruction in an adult ENL Saturday class which focuses on communication, citizenship and practical skills such as letter writing and filling out job applications. They also learn basic technology skills such as word processing, e-mail and Internet resources. Parents of ELLs are also involved through the PTA and the SLT team. In addition to parent orientations, we will continue hold mandated individual meetings with parents and LTP members as per CR part 154 requirements. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Orientations, presentations at PTA meetings, Achievement Celebration Nights, Workshops by the Hispanic Federation and El Sol, Paint Nite,Saturday Parent ENL academy. Our parents receive training in the 7 habits of a good reader. Afterward, parents work in teams to help one another develop specific strategies for their child. These are then discussed with the academic adviser for approval and implementation. Parents participate in school trips including our partnership with Repertorio Espanol and Oratorio Society at Carnegie Hall. Both the School Leadership Team and The Parent Executive Board contain parents of ELLs. Our Parent coordinator, Karen Nguyen will help us to promote these events, provide outreach and notify parents and provide translation when needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ana R. Zambrano-Burakov, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HS for Arts and Business School DBN: 24Q550 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Ana Zambrano-Burakov Principal Evelyn Acosta Assistant Principal Karen Nguyen Parent Coordinator Claudia Feltenstein ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Quiroz Parent Claudia Velarde Teacher/Subject Area Maria Chacon Teacher/Subject Area n/a Coach Coach Mariana Reynoso School Counselor William Renteria Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Bilingual Science Teacher Other Other 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 10/6/17 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q550 School Name: High School for Arts and Business Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Evelyn Acosta Assistant Principal No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parent/Guardian translation needs are determined by the parental language of preference indicated on the blue emergency card and the Home Language Survey. The information is entered into ATS and used to determine the language of translation necessary. HLIS reports are reviewed by the different constituencies in order to identify the languages spoken by the parents of students. Once the languages are identified, the proper resources and translators are acquired in order to meet the language needs of parents. Reports are monitored by our Pupil Personnel secretary to make sure that they are accurate and that all information is obtained in a timely manner. Home Language Surveys are reviewed by LAB/BESIS coordinator, Claudia Feltenstein in order to determine languages spoken and translation needs. Major findings include the need to have more frequent contact in our major language (Spanish) with parents regarding their children's interim academic progress. All communication regarding academic, after-school or 2018-19 CEP 70  socio-emotional activities is translated. We found that it is necessary to translate messages that are communicated via School Messenger. Due to the high-low income population of our school, it is critical to provide immediate oral translation, given the sacrifices of parents to visit the school, often without an appointment, to assess their child's academic progress. The findings are reported to the school community via PTA meetings, Parent Orientations and School Leadership Team. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Cebuano Chinese French Haitian Creole Hindi Indonesian Japanese Mandarin English Pilipino (Tagalog) Punjabi Polish Portugese Russian Slovak Spanish Setswana Urdu 3 17 2 28 1 1 1 2 6 0 442 1 1 2 1 1 0 741 1 1 0.24 1.36 0.16 2.23 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.16 0.48 0 35.28 0.08 0.08 0.16 0.08 0.08 0 59.14 0.08 0.08 5 17 2 26 1 1 1 2 6 2 441 1 1 3 1 1 1 740 0 1 0.4 1.36 0.16 2.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.16 0.48 0.16 35.2 0.08 0.08 0.24 0.08 0.08 0.08 59.06 0 0.08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 71  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Monthly Parent Newsletters which contains upcoming events and critical information. Newsletters are mailed to parents at the beginning of each month. Letters notifying parents of upcoming workshops, school events such as Awards ceremonies (taking place in March and June) and PTA meetings (monthly) and workshops (several times a year) are translated. The school discipline code and Pupil Path registration information is translated. Letters and flyers are distributed promoting school and community events that can benefit our community. On-going School leadership letters that contain testing dates or important information that affects the school calendar is also translated. Monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly newsletter is first created in draft mode by the parent coordinator, Ms. Karen Nguyen. Afterwards, Mr. Liu , Assistant Principal Organization adds Calendar Events and sends it to Ms. Zambrano-Burakov, Principal, for approval. The Newsletter is then sent for translation into Spanish by Ms.Chacón, our translator. Most of our written documentation is translated in-house, otherwise we will request translation to the Translation and Interpretation unit at least two weeks ahead of time. The School Discipline Code is already translated in the targeted languages and distributed to students and families. Pupil Path comments are also available in multiple languages. In addition, we use our translation funds to individualize comments, letter or phone calls to parents. We have Spanish translation at every SLT meeting. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Freshman parent orientation Every June ENL orientation On-going interpretation service(s)? Information is gathered from the registration forms, articulation visits and feeder schools guidance counselors. We then hire translators to service the parents during the orientation. ENL orientations are conducted in English and Spanish by Ms. Feltenstein, ELL coordinator, Ms. 2018-19 CEP 72  Parent Teacher Conferences Four times a year Saturday Parent Institute WeeklyStarting in November Parent Topic Workshops Monthly Parents also attend our Music and Art concerts as well as Award Nights Twice a year Informal interactions with parents include meetings with the attendance teacher, guidance and dean's conferences as well as IEP meetings. On-Going Chacon, Spanish interpreter and Ms. Acosta, Assistant Principal, also a Spanish interpreter and translation unit as needed. Translation Unit, Bilingual teachers, Bilingual support staff, Bilingual Administrator, Bilingual Principal, PTA Bilingual vounteers and Bilingual Student Teachers. ELL adult classes are taught by Ms. Stoyanoff, who is Bilingual in both English and Spanish. We also have a variety of workshops offered. During the PTA meetings, parents are surveyed. This information helps us plans our monthly workshops for the year. Interpreting is available by our Spanish speaking staff. In addition, our Leadership class and National Honor Society students assist parents. Translation Unit, Bilingual teachers, Bilingual support staff, Bilingual Administrator, Bilingual Principal, PTA Bilingual vounteers and Bilingual Student Teachers 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our phone master system is equipped to send messages in several languages. In addition, identified bilingual staff has been identified to leave specific messages pertaining to our school. This system will also be utilized for emergency messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information is shared during our Faculty Meetings and PTA meetings. In addition, we display the information on posters throughout the building. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 73  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Notification requirements for translation and interpretation services will be clearly visible. The Welcome Poster will be posted in the lobby as well as in other visible areas such as the Parent Coordinator's Office. At orientation, parents will be given a copy of the Parent's Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access. Parents are also notified by key personnel about their rights to language and translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As a staff, we will discuss the results of parents surveys as well as informal feedback given by parents during the school year in order to assess and modify our translation needs. We will also get feedback from parents who are part of the PTA and School Leadership Team as well as parents who attend our workshops such as our ESL parent classes. We have learned that our parents still like to receive information via mail and phone calls. Although we are implementing e-mail to the parents that request it, we continue to honor the parents preferred method of communication. 2018-19 CEP 74 
