2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 26Q566 School Name: QUEENS HIGH SCHOOL OF TEACHING, LIBERAL ARTS AND THE SCIENCES Principal: EAN CORRADO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Queens High School of Teaching 26Q566 9-12 School Number (DBN): 26Q566 74-20 Commonwealth Blvd Bellerose, NY 11735 718-736-7100 Phone Number: 718-736-7125 Fax: Ean Corrado ecorrado@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Ean Corrado Laurie Kucic Co Presidents - Cynthia Brown & Shelly Harrington Ean Corrado N/A Jenny Samaroo Amanda Harrington N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Pl Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-3517 Phone Number: (718) 281-3517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ean Corrado Laurie Kucic Co President -S. Harrington & C. Brown N/A Jenny Samaroo Amanda Harrington Nicole Woods Chantel McBride Sandreaus Cobb *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Karen Cassandro Lori Mayo Jamie Selip Sabaa Daly Shelly Harrington Cynthia Brown Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/CSA - APO - Team Leader Member/ PTACo President Member/ PTACo President Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Queens High School of Teaching Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The Queens High School of Teaching is different by design; developing diverse learners who are prepared to become leaders, and teachers, in their communities and productive members of a global society. Our small learning communities provide a framework where students are encouraged to perform to their highest potential through differentiated instruction, student centered classrooms and instilling school wide values. Creating an inclusive environment, we promote the ethical and moral development of our students. Through distributive leadership, 2018-19 CEP 9  students, staff, parents and other stakeholders fully participate in the teaching and learning process, while continuously reflecting, assessing and modifying our practices. As a proving ground for sound educational pedagogy, we are committed to ensuring that our students become lifelong learners enabling them to adapt to an ever changing world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Queens High School of Teaching (QHST) is a NYCDOE school community that "by design" is organized and structured to facilitate the highest levels of communication across all stakeholders (including: professionals, students and teachers, and the school and home community), which in turn facilitates the development of the deep and meaningful best practice relationships necessary to create the highly effective school-wide systems of collaboration and support for all, leading to the achievement of the highest levels of success for all members of our school community - including student performance, progress, and learning, professional development and learning, and organizational improvement and learning. Our Highly Effective "Different by Design" model includes: A Small Learning Community Model - QHST is composed of three Small Learning Communities (SLCs), each with a dedicated team of teachers and support staff, and lead by an SLC Director/AP. Each SLC is composed of ~400 students, ~100 students per grade. Each year, our total 9th grade class of ~ 300 students is divided into 3 cohorts of ~100 students each that identically mirrors the total class demographic and performance curve, which as per our Educational Option Enrollment Model creates a diverse, heterogeneous, and mixed ability learning environment for all students. Additionally, our SLC model takes a "medium sized" school of ~1200 students and creates smaller units, through which we can better personalize the learning for all students, and form deeper and more meaningful relationships between all stakeholders. The relationships create improved communication and collaboration between professionals, students, and families, which yields high levels of support for all, leading to improved student outcomes. Grade Level Teams (GLTs) and a Cohort Model - In each SLC, Grade Level Teams (GLTs) support a cohort of grade level students in grades 9-12. Teams are composed of a teacher from each content area and include a special education teacher. Grade Level Teams meet together 3xs per week for an hour each meeting. They plan instruction, engage in professional learning, and collaborate in support of student success. Teaching Institute – Students are able to experience practical teaching internships with teaching professionals at one of the three campus or surrounding schools and attend weekly teaching seminars. Students who successfully participate in the TI program will graduate with a teaching diploma. Student-Centered Inquiry-Based Collaborative classrooms - Students work in groups that are mapped based on student performance data. Teacher teams continue to monitor performance and as a result, students are regrouped periodically. Formative assessment data informs flexible grouping which leads to high levels of differentiated learning for all students. Extended School Year - Our unique instructional work is also evident in our extended year summer program where interdisciplinary teams aim to address the student’s learning needs. Interdisciplinary teacher teams design summer curriculum framed around a common theme. The program has been a recipient of grants and awards. Other schools have also used this program as a model for their summer program. Student Culture 2018-19 CEP 10  Student voice – Student voice is an important component of our school culture. Each SLC has their student government who are elected into office. To align the voice of students across all three SLCs, all students who are elected into office participate in a weekly leadership seminar with our COSAs. This provides a structured forum for adults and students to communicate on a regular basis. Our Advisory structure also allows students with a forum to communicate and raise issues in a small group setting. Guidance Counselors, APs and teachers communicate regularly with students through this structure regularly. Lastly, all administrators, teachers and staff have an open door policy with students. Summer Bridge - All incoming 9th grade students are offered the opportunity to participate in our QHST Summer Bridge Experience. This program was designed by staff and students to ease the transition from junior high to high school from both an academic and social emotional standpoint. The program is four days of workshops, activities, and high school preparatory learning experiences facilitated by current QHST students and our Coordinator of Student Activities. Topics include an introduction content and skills essential for high school success such as: QHST School Wide Values, Organizational Skills, Time Management and Study Techniques, Cooperative Learning Protocols, Decision Making Skills, Problem Solving Strategies, Communication Skills, Team Building Activities, Social Emotional Learning, and an introduction to QHST school culture. Personalized Learning Environment – Our GLT and Advisory structure support our core value of creating and facilitating a personalized learning environment where students are known well, and are supported to achieve the highest levels of success in high school, college, and beyond. Grade Level Teacher Teams meet three times a week for an hour to discuss students, plan and revise curriculum, engage in professional learning & inquiry and develop student social, emotional, and behavioral interventions. Instruction in all classes is aligned to college ready standards and highly differentiated to support the highest levels of access, equity, rigor, and success for all students. Social/Emotional Development & Extended School Day Activities – Through our vibrant Extended School Day Life, student created and facilitated clubs (which may vary from year to year) including our: Save Our Society (SOS) Club, Habitat for Humanity Club, Gay-Straight Alliance (GSA), Dance Club, Music Club and/or Anti-Bullying Club students have the opportunity to develop their social & emotional skills & intelligences, and form deep and meaningful relationships with students and staff members, and dispositions that align to our School-Wide Values, including inclusion, compassion, community, and respect. Community Culture Leadership Breakfast - The Annual School Leadership Breakfast allows all of our community partners and leaders the opportunity to gather together to reflect on our partnerships and celebrate the many accomplishments that have resulted from the collaborations. NYC Councilman Barry Grodenchick, Congresswoman Grace Meng, NYC Councilman Leroy Comrie, State Assemblyman David Weprin and State Senator Tony Avella were among the community leaders that were represented at the leadership breakfast. In addition, leaders from our community partners (i.e. Samuel Field Y) and College and University partners (Queens College, Adelphi University, St. John’s University) all attend this event. College Going Culture 9-12, College Awareness and Our QHST College & Carer Readiness Center - QHST embraces the goal of ensuring that our students are provided with the maximum opportunities to become college and career ready, including all students' participation in a school community with a strong college going culture 9-12th grade. At the center of our work in this area is our QHST College & Career Readiness Center. All QHST students are provided with individualized college and career advisement and support throughout their four years of high school. Though our annual family empowerment events including Financial Aid Night, Senior Night, and Junior Night, we engage students and families around what they need to know and be able to do to identify, select, and 2018-19 CEP 11  apply to the post secondary institutions of their choice. We invite all members of our school community to attend these events and provide direct supports for the completion of the college application process and application for financial aid. Through the combined efforts of our PTA, COSAs, and Guidance Counselors, these evenings continue to be very well attended and highly informative. This school year, our new partnership with College Access for All will support monthly Advisory events for all students, 9-12, including College Application Week, Financial Aid Week, and Decision Day. Samuel Field Y (SFY) - Our partnership with local CBO the SFY includes our collaborative success with both a NYSED After School Extended School Day Grant which provides funding supports for our after school academic interventions and socially themed clubs and an ISY program which provides work-based learning and job training, and academic supports for at risk students. Additionally, SFY counselors assist our QHST College Counselor in providing supports for students and families throughout the college application process, and our school community in our development of strong college going culture, 9-12. WEDIKO - Our new partnership with WEDIKO brings experts in the field of Youth Development, Parent & Family Empowerment, and social, emotional & behavioral learning and supports to our QHST school community. Wediko social workers support our QHST Grade Level Teams to facilitate the highest levels of student success during our weekly Kid Talk professional learning activities, through the implementation of a research and data-based case conferencing response to intervention model. In addition, Wediko social workers have partnered with our Coordinators of Student Activities and Conflict Resolution Specialist to create a Conflict Resolution and Peer Mediation Center. When students need intensive counseling supports, Wediko's clinically trained social workers and counselors provide 1:1 and small group counseling and mental health supports for students and families. Our partnership with Wediko has supported the improvement of our school-wide Advisory structures through the creation and facilitation of professional learning experiences for teachers in areas including Restorative Justice, Social Emotional Learning, Conflict Resolution, and Advisory Circles. Collaborative Environment, Communication and Professional Learning Grade Level Teams - Our Grade Level Team (GLT) model cultivates a collaborative culture for professional learning and student support, and is the foundation for our development of a strong QHST professional learning community. SLC Assistant Principals meet with GLT Team Facilitators (TFs) weekly to facilitate professional learning, model best practices, provide guidance around problems of practice, develop agendas, and at times, create activity guides for GLT meetings. Teacher teams share student data during weekly Kid Talk sessions and implement interventions and behavioral/academic supports for students. Additionally, GLTs engage in professional learning and inquiry including Critical Friends Group sessions using protocols and engage in action research projects through our QHST model of Disciplined Collaboration Job-Embedded Professional Learning (i.e. inquiry projects). This GLT structure also provides the Principal with the opportunity to visit grade teams of teachers and discuss school wide issues related to instruction, student interventions, and school culture. GLTs are also used to conference with parents and families, and plan Advisory lessons. In one example, a grade team facilitated an intervention workshop for struggling students and parents on how they can improve their academic experience. GLTs also provide the opportunity to celebrate and recognize student work and accomplishments. As the grade team shares the same ~100 students, they plan interdisciplinary projects. In many cases, student groups present these projects through an exhibition to the entire grade team of teachers and students. Principal Information Sheet – The Principal Information Sheet is a communication tool sent by the principal to all staff on a weekly basis. This tool is used to communicate our instructional vision, celebrate best practice, student/teacher 2018-19 CEP 12  successes, and share resources with staff and students. The Principal uses the weekly information sheet to clarify the school mission, vision, and values, and ensure that all staff members have clear expectations regarding our instructional focus. College Preparedness and Readiness Culture Senior Seminar and Partnership with St. Johns Student Advantage: All QHST Seniors are enrolled in a cross community senior elective to enrich their senior year experience and give them the opportunity to learn alongside seniors from other communities. Several of these engaging courses have been accredited by St. John’s University. Students can earn up to three transferable college credits through this partnership. Additionally, for the first time this school year, all 12th grade students are required to select a 4th year of Science or Mathematics to support high levels of college readiness for all students. Bridge to College - This summer program supports graduating seniors with college matriculation, advisement and other assistance during from graduation through their enrollment and first day of college. QHST graduates who are upperclassmen or have graduated college work at QHST throughout the summer conducting outreach to graduating seniors to ensure that after successfully completing high school, all QHST students enroll in college. Advanced Placement Classes: Access, Equity, Rigor, & College Readiness for All Students – To support high levels of access, equity, rigor, and college readiness for all students, we have aligned 4 College Board Advanced Placement Courses to NYSED high school graduation requirements, and students can complete both experiences simultaneously. All 9th grade students take AP Human Geography, and all 11th grade students take AP United States History, AP Environmental Science, AP English Language. Additionally, we offer Computer Science Principals to all 9th grade students who have successfully met the Regents Algebra standards in middle school. 10th grade students have the option to enroll in AP Psychology. And 12th grade students have the option to enroll in AP English Literature, AP Computer Science Principles, and AP Statistics. Through the implementation of a tiered Student Friendly Learning Goal Model and differentiated and scaffolded supports, we create high levels of college ready learning and facilitate learning success for all students in mixed ability classes. College Now – This free program is designed to prepare New York City’s high school students for college to ensure we have a class in each content area. The program offers eligible students ways to improve their high school performance and get a head start on college by taking academic courses for high school and college credit. Our Danielson Aligned QHST Instructional Framework Our unique and "different by design" collaboratively created QHST Instructional Framework supports high levels of success for all students. It includes:  The QHST School Wide Foundational Best Practices – Five instructional strategies which lie at the core and form the foundation for the best practice instruction found in the classrooms of the Queens High School of Teaching. Practices include: Essential and/or Focus Questions, Daily Agendas, Student’s Immediate Engagement in Learning, Celebration and Recognition of Student Work and Accomplishment, and Classroom Organizational Systems and Structures.  The QHST Goal Assessment Loop – A transparent system of instructional planning, facilitation, assessment, reflection, and revision which aligns to the Common Core Learning Standards, empowers students with the 2018-19 CEP 13  information they need to clearly understand what it means to know and be able to do, and gathers the data necessary to differentiate instruction for all learners and make the instructional shifts required to provide all students with the opportunities to achieve, perform, and progress at the highest levels.  The QHST Inquiry – Based, Student Centered, Cooperative Instructional Model to Engage All Students IN Learning– Since our inception in 2003, the classrooms of the Queens High School of Teaching have brought learning to life for students via instructional experiences which are rigorous, inquiry-based, student centered, and cooperative. The best practice inquiry-based classroom at QHST facilitates learning through questioning, utilizing multiple sources and representing diverse perspectives. Learning in the classroom is student centered and collaborative and fosters analysis and high order thinking. As a result of the QHST inquiry process, students collaboratively create new knowledge that is authentic, relevant, and applicable to the real world. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Queens High School of Teaching is a fully inclusive school community. We use data driven student grouping to intentionally create inclusive classrooms of learners that mirror the diversity of the real world and support our students' development of both the academic and social emotional skills necessary for success at the highest levels in high school, college, and beyond. We accept students through an enrollment model that creates cohorts of students with bell curve performance demographics. There are students with and without IEPs in all QHST classes, and approximately 21% of our total student community have IEPs. Students with IEPs are supported academically through ICT and/or SETSS services, a grade level team embedded special education teacher, and a team of interdisciplinary teachers. Our diverse student population and inclusive cohort model requires that teachers are trained to provide all students with high levels of differentiated supports, in a mixed ability setting. To support the ~ 2/3s of incoming students who struggled to meet middle school mathematics standards, we have created and implemented additional supports and learning experiences including Algebra Workshop and Geometry Workshop courses, which provide an additional 3 hours of math content learning that is facilitated by the same teacher that facilitates the students' Regents Algebra and Regents Geometry classes. Additionally, for incoming students who struggle to meet the middle school ELA standards necessary for high school readiness, we have created and implemented a 9th grade Literacy Workshop course, which provide an additional 3 hours of ELA content learning that is facilitated by the same teacher that facilitates the students' 9th grade ELA class. Aligning the teachers and students in these Workshop experiences provides the highest levels of coherence between the NYSED standards-based Regents content area classes and these targeted supplemental learning experiences. QHST is a model Collaborative Community as a result of our best practice inclusion practices, and the well developed and highly effective inclusion partnership we have developed with our D75 partners from P811Q. Through the collaboration, up to three students are included in each GLT across the three small learning communities. In total we have approximately ~36 fully included D75 students. The students are supported by D75 SETTS providers, or as we like to call them - QHST SLC Inclusion Specialists, who are embedded members of the QHST staff and Grade Level Teams, and also serve as Advisors to all students through our QHST Advisory classes. This school year, we look forward to expanding our work in special education, specifically Integrated Co-Teaching practices, through our collaboration with DOE Nest, as we create a QHST school community with highly effective academic and social-emotional supports for students on the Autism spectrum. In collaboration with NYU and Hunter College, we implement an ICT, SETSS, and SDI learning experiences and supports to ensure that students who enroll in QHST through the NEST program are provided with the social, emotional, behavioral supports to ensure that they are provided with the highest levels of access, equity, and success throughout their high school experience. 2018-19 CEP 14  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, QHST made the most progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction. A shared understanding of how student’s learn best - our QHST Instructional Framework, was designed and implemented over the last few years, and continues to evolve and support the development of best practice teaching and learning across all QHST classrooms. During the 2017-2018 school year we finalized the development of and implemented a fourth component to our QHST Instructional Framework - the Teaching to Learn model. Although we continue improving our school wide systems and structures of rigorous instruction though curriculum development and professional development, we have seen an improvement in student performance in scholarship data, regents performance data and graduation data. We have improved our ongoing formative assessment systems and differentiated support for all students in our classrooms, and our curriculum planning and development through our professional development work both in both GLTs and Content Teams. During the 2018-2019 School Year, through our implementation of our highly differentiated Teaching to Learn Model, we will be increasing our students' access to highly differentiated and rigorous learning experiences through implementation of College Board Advanced Placement curriculum including AP Human Geography in 9th grade, AP US History, AP Environmental Science, and AP ELA Language and Composition in 11th grade, for all students. An area we continue to strive to improve is the work of our Collaborative Teachers through professional development work in Grade Level Teams and Content Teams. A pillar of QHST’s instructional model involves the collaborative work of our teachers in Grade Level Teams (GLT). GLTs consist of an interdisciplinary team of teachers that support a shared cohort of approximately 100 students. GLTs also met three times per week for three one hour meetings, each with a specific focus: Kid Talk, Professional Learning and Organizational work of the team. We continue to focus our professional development systems and structures on improving the work of these teacher teams in both the areas of Kid Talk and Professional Learning. We have redefined the work of our GLTs with the development and implementation of our QHST Disciplined Collaboration (DC) Model, and this year have created and will fully implement our DC structure of Job-Embedded Professional Learning - our own unique iteration on traditional "inquiry work". Our model of Disciplined Collaboration is designed with the impact of our teacher teams' work on their students at the center. This model offers a clear theory of action focusing on creating the conditions, and outlining the skills necessary to support positive and effective collaborative professional learning with the primary function and goal of improving student learning and outcomes. The three phases of our Disciplined Collaboration Model (Innovation, Implementation and Evaluation) provide the structure for application to all aspects of our GLT work. During the 2018-2019 School Year we have additionally developed a system of horizontal content team collaboration which will included a weekly team meeting to support improved content team collaboration, curriculum and assessment development, and professional learning. 2018-19 CEP 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q566 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1073 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 2 9 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 44.3% % Reduced Lunch 2.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 14.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.88 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 85% 91.1% 19.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 185 156 4 90.1% 7.7% 20.6% 55.2% 20.7% 3.2% 8 64% 7.5 N/A N/A 87% 91% 92.5% 25% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data sources including the School Quality Guide and School Quality review continues to identify our work in the area of Rigorous Instruction as effective. QHST students continue to achieve annual attendance and graduation rates above 90%. As a result of the April 2018 School Quality Review, in both areas - 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards & 2.2 Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels, were rated as Well Developed. As a result of our April 2018 School Qualify Review, in the areas of quality indicator 1.2 - Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products, we were rated a Proficient. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide identified 61% of QHST students successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and exams. and 55% as graduated college ready (met CUNY's standards for avoiding remedial classes). Additionally, MOTP data points to a need for continued improvement in teaching and learning in our QHST classrooms. During the 2017-2018 school year, our Superintendent Reviews have indicated Developing practice in the areas of 1.1 and 1.2, and continued need for improvement in classroom instruction - most specifically in Danielson Competencies: 3b Questioning & Discussion, 3c Engagement in Learning, and 3d Assessment. To support continued improvement in these areas we will leverage specific elements of our QHST Instructional Framework including our Goal Assessment Loop (Competency 3d – Using Assessment in Instruction), QHST Engaging Student IN Learning (ESIL) model (Competency 3c Intellectual Engagement), and our new Teaching to Learn Model of differentiated student goal setting and skill-based instruction. We will continue to engage in professional learning experiences aimed to support teachers' creation of differentiated and measurable student friendly learning gaols, and 2018-19 CEP 17  aligned formative assessments, to support effective implementation of our Goal Assessment Loop and Teaching to Learn Model, which will support high levels of differentiated instruction and rigorous learning for all students, including different types of learners and target subgroups (SWD, ELLs). By clearly identifying what students should be able to do and learn, and meeting students where they are to create access points for success and learning for all diverse students, teachers are able to create lessons that are aligned to these learning goals and use ongoing formative assessments to check for understanding, differentiate, and adjust teaching and learning to support high levels of rigor and success for all. Based on the learning data teachers gather from the formative assessments, teachers can analyze data and make informed decisions on next steps with respect to student learning experiences and needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in line with Danielson Competencies 3c and 3d, 80% of QHST teachers will implement a system of 3 leveled learning goals and aligned ongoing formative assessments during classroom learning experiences, minimally implementing 3 clear and effective tired student friendly learning goals and aligned formative assessments/checks for student understanding in a 60 min class period - for example, one formative assessment/check for understanding following the mini lesson, one following students' independent work/practice, and one at the conclusion of the lesson in the form of an exit slip type assessment. Three tiered student friendly learning goals will both drive access and differentiated learning for all students, and formative assessment practices for teachers. Teachers will use the assessment data that they collect to provide feedback to groups of, and individual students, and to modify instruction to support improved student learning, progress, and performance. While we are implementing this work in all content areas this school year, we began to pilot this work in our ELA classrooms last school year. That said, this school year, our ELA teachers are creating and implementing new curriculum fully aligned to this new model. By June 2019, student performance on the ELA Regents Exam will increase by 2 percentage points, and progress (as indicated by teacher MOSL scores) will increase by 5 points. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A comprehensive PD plan with a focus on our Instructional Framework for the year will provide a focus on our Teaching to Learn Model and Goal Assessment Loop, through the use of monthly SLC whole faculty professional learning meetings, Grade Team professional learning meetings, and Horizontal Content Area Team professional learning meetings. · School Administrators, Instructional Coaches and teacher leaders will provide feedback and coaching notes after classroom visits. · We have partnered with a former Adelphi University student teacher supervisor to provide support for our new, un-tenured, and struggling teachers. She has scheduled individual meetings/observations with teachers, as well as large group meetings where teachers discuss and share ideas around instruction and student learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept 2018 - Administration & Teacher Leaders May 2019 All Teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders, Instructional Coaches and New/Un-tenured Teacher Coach · Principal, APs, Team Facilitators, teacher leaders and teacher teams will facilitate learning walkthroughs to share best practice and align our focus around the identified instructional goals. Teacher Teams, Parents Oct 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Leaders, APs, Principal, Parents, PTA president Parents will be engaged in the school's instructional focus by having updates shared at bimonthly PTA meetings, monthly School Leadership Team meetings and bi-annual parent newsletters. · GLT Facilitators and Content Team Facilitators will facilitate Critical Friend’s Group sessions. Teacher team will analyze student work and make informed decisions to improve their own professional practice. Critical Friends Groups sessions will focus on the various subgroups within the student cohort taught by the teacher team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teacher Teams Sept APs and Teacher Team Leaders 2018 – June 2019 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use our Parent Coordinator, Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, and SLT to communicate with parents at intentionally planned Family Engagement Events, and meetings to discuss what best practice teaching and learning looks like at the Queens High School of Teaching. We will facilitate monthly Family Advisory Night where we aim to engage parents in all aspects of school work and will update parents on the successes of the instructional program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Facilitation of In House Instructional Workshops - Planning and Development Meetings Un-tenured Teacher Coach - ~2 Days per work @ QHST Center for Professional Excellence of Teachers - Coaching and Professional Learning Creation & Facilitation SLC Assistant Principals of Instruction - Professional Development and Planning Meetings BFSC Supports Peer Collaborative Teachers - 2 Creation Grade Level Team and Content Team Facilitator Positions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the start of our Spring Term, the School Leadership Team will meet to evaluate interim progress toward meeting goals. Assistant Principals from each SLC gather feedback from GLT facilitators and present artifacts that demonstrate progress toward meeting this goal. Teacher Leader PCTs will meet with Content Team Facilitators to gather artifacts and data aligned to progress in the this areas as well. This allows the principal and the leadership team to gather multiple perspectives and make informed decisions about next steps. We will also collectively look at both the school wide ratings and SLC/GLT specific ratings for competency 3c and 3d throughout the year. To monitor progress at this midpoint benchmark we will analyze MOTP observation data including individual teacher observation reports and quantitative data aligned to Danielson competencies 3d and 3c from across teachers and observation dates. Additionally, in line with our focus on ELA, we will create a horizontally aligned mid-term Regents aligned predictive assessment in 10th grade ELA. Student progress and performance on our 10th grade ELA midterm predictive assessment will indicate alignment to our goal of a 2.5% increase in overall performance and a 5% increase in student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will review ADVANCE observation reports and ratings as a leadership team. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. As evidenced by our 2017-2018 School Quality Review, the Queens High School of Teaching school community is Well Developed in areas including: Maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults, (2) Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and providing supports to achieve those expectations, (3) Ensuring engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards, (4) Aligning assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels, and (5) Making strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. As evidenced by our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, the Queens High School of Teaching school community was rated as "Good" in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment, and identified as supporting 91% of 9th grade students and 92% of 10th grade students as earning enough credits to be effectively on track for graduation in four year. Additionally, the 2016-2017 Quality Guide identified a 91% 4 year graduation rate with 99% of incoming students at performance levels 3 & 4, and 92% of incoming students at performance level 2 graduating in 4 years. We also had a 91% Attendance Rate for that same year. We were also rated "Excellent" with the movement of students with special needs to less restrictive environments. 2. During the 2017-2018 school year, OORS data indicated a total of 239 total Suspensions. 3. A culture of high levels of support and the creation of highly effective relationships across all stakeholders, and a best practice school wide culture continues to be a strength at QHST, as evidenced by our April 2018 School Quality Review, 2017-2018 School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey. Our GLT and Advisory structure support our core value of creating and facilitating a personalized learning environment where students are known well, and are supported to achieve the highest levels of success in high school, college, and beyond. Grade Level Teacher Teams meet three times a week for an hour to discuss students, plan and revise curriculum, engage in professional learning & inquiry and develop student social, emotional, and behavioral interventions. Instruction in all classes is aligned to college ready standards and highly differentiated to support the highest levels of access, equity, rigor, and success for all students. Through our vibrant Extended School Day Life, student created and facilitated clubs (which may vary from year to year) including our: Save Our Society (SOS) Club, Habitat for Humanity Club, Gay-Straight Alliance (GSA), Dance Club, Music Club and/or Anti-Bullying Club students have the opportunity to develop their social & emotional skills & intelligences, and form deep and meaningful relationships with students and staff members, and dispositions that align to our School-Wide Values, including inclusion, compassion, community, and respect. 2018-19 CEP 22  Our QHST school community has always emphasized the importance of supporting students' social-emotional growth and learning, and students’ development of the academic and personal behaviors necessary for success high school, college, and beyond. With the support of our partners at WEDIKO, the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, the Samuel Field Y, and Queens North BFSC, during the 2018-2019 school year, we aim to continue to build and develop QHST classroom and school wide culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenges by their teachers and peers. To continue to develop our work in this area, we aim to continue to improve the work we do in the areas of social-emotional and behavioral learning and relationship building, through the improvement of our Advisory systems, structures, and learning experiences. In collaboration with our partners, during the 2018-2019 school year, we will build on the work we started this school year and continue to develop comprehensive systems to support students' social-emotional development and learning through Advisory. We will continue to provide teachers and support staff with the professional learning experiences necessary to develop the skills to teach students social and emotional skills, and effective communication and conflict resolution strategies. We will provide specialized professional development for teachers and support staff on strategies for improving students’ social-emotional development, communication and conflict resolution skills, and de-escalation of conflict. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the QHST Leadership Team will collaborate with our SLT, PTA, students, families, teachers, and support staff to continue to develop school and classroom cultures where all students feel intellectually and emotionally engaged, safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers, as indicated by implementation best practice systems and structures of Youth Development, including Classroom Circles, Just Say Hi, and Yale RULER by 100% of Advisory classrooms across all 3 QHST Small Learning Communities. As a result of this work, by June 2019, we will reduce our numbers of suspensions by 5% 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Form Advisory Task Force to begin leading implementation of new Advisory curriculum map and lead implementation of new learning experiences, initiatives, and professional learning for staff. Task Force will meet monthly Sept-June. Partners from WEDIKO, SFY, and BFSC will continue to facilitate professional development experiences for Grade Level Teacher Teams (building on the work we started during the spring of 2018) in areas including Advisory classroom circles, relationship building, and conflict resolution and de-escalation. We will create and implement a series of Family DEAR/Advisory nights - one per month Oct through May - intended to include all QHST stakeholders in the work of SEL and highly effective relationship building. Students, Families, staff members, and partners. Implement weekly Advisory learning experiences and school wide Advisory activities (aligned to our work in the areas of Yale Ruler, Classroom Circles, Just Say High, Conflict Resolution and Deescalation, community building) to support students' development of effective social, emotional, and behavioral dispositions and skills, and the creation of best practice school-wide relationships and community. Students and teacher-Advisers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students, Teachers, SLC Deans and Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, SFY, WEDIKO, PTA, and School Leadership - Principal, APO and SLC APs Grade Level Teams of Teachers, SLC Deans and Guidance Counselors Sept 2018 – June 2019 Principal, APO, SLC APs and Coordinator of Student Activities, Tone, and Culture, and partners from SFY and WEDIKO Principal, SLC Assistant Principals, APO, Coordinator of Student Activities, Tone and Culture QHST Leadership Team - Principal, APO, SLC APs, COSA, WEDIKO & SFY QHST Leadership Team Principal, APO, SLC APs Sept 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use our Parent Coordinator, Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, and SLT to communicate with parents at intentionally planned Family Engagement Events, and meetings to discuss what best practice SEL teaching and learning and a best practice school community with highly effective relationships across all stakeholders looks like for all students at the Queens High School of Teaching. We will reflect on the work review progress toward meeting the goals, revising our action plans when necessary, at weekly QHST Leadership Team meetings, monthly SLT meetings, and Advisory Task Force Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School wide Advisory Task Force will meet to engage in school wide planning and turnkey for implementation to SLCs and GLTs through weekly GLT meetings and monthly SLC Faculty Professional Learning meetings. We will continue to partner with WEDIKO, SFY, and our BFSC Student Support Team. We further develop our collaboration with the Morningside Center to support our work with Circles. Family Advisory Nights will be facilitated monthly in the evenings and will aim to include all members of our QHST school community, light refreshments, community building, and Advisory learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 2018, we will form our 2018-19 Advisory Task Force and create a regular schedule of meetings. By October 2018 we will schedule, plan, and facilitate our first Family Advisory Night. By the end of the Fall 2018 Term, we will be implementing new Advisory learning experiences aligned to Just Say Hi, Advisory Circles, Conflict Resolution, and relationship building, and will survey students and teachers to evaluate the effectiveness of the new work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use surveys of all members of our school community, including Exit Tickets at Family Advisory Nights and at the conclusion of Advisory Learning experiences with students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Grade Level Team model cultivates a collaborative culture for professional learning. SLC APs meet with GLT TFs weekly to provide guidance, develop agendas and at times, create activity guides for GLT meetings. Teacher teams share student data during weekly kid talk sessions and implement interventions and behavioral/academic supports for students. Additionally, GLTs engage in Critical Friends Group sessions and engage in action research projects (i.e. inquiry projects). Teachers who participate in CFGs seek to improve student achievement by sharing student work and the associated student activity guide/lesson plan or task. The GLT leader facilitates the reflective session through the use of a hybrid tuning protocol. This structure also provides the Principal the opportunity to visit grade teams and discuss school wide issues related to instruction and student interventions. GLTs are also used to conference with parents. In one example, a grade team facilitated an intervention workshop for struggling students and parents on how they can improve their academic experience. GLTs also provide the opportunity to celebrate and recognize student work accomplishments. As the grade team shares the same ~100 students, they plan interdisciplinary projects. In many cases, student groups present these projects through an exhibition to the entire grade team of teachers and students. As this has always been a pillar at QHST, improving this professional practice around teacher collaboration is an annual goal. To evaluate progress in this area we will use data sources including the NYCDOE School Survey, internal teacher survey measures, the School Quality Review, and feedback from central-led reviewers including the Superintendent and PLF during PPO visits. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all QHST Grade Level Teams will have effectively engaged in at least 3 full cycles of job-embedded professional learning aligned to our Teaching to Learn model and will share their learnings with the larger school community through the creation of a summative reflective presentation (PowerPoint and team presentation) and a Gallery Walk (1 Pager) Artifact for our school wide Inquiry Share Fair during our Brooklyn Queens Day Chancellors Day of Professional Learning. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will be programmed to meet with interdisciplinary grade level team three times per week for an hour each meeting. These meetings will include Special Education Teachers and ELL Teachers. Principal will meet with Assistant Principals weekly to share best practice and professional literature as it relates to teacher grade team professional learning and kid talk. Assistant Principals will meet with their teacher leadership team to discuss action plans as it relates to grade team professional work and kid talk Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept APO and Programmers 2018 – June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Sept Principal and Assistant Principals 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 SLC Assistant Principal and Team Facilitators Data will be shared with grade teams to collaboratively plan advisory activities, provide targeted instructional supports for students and plan interdisciplinary projects Teachers and Students Professional Development Days will involve teacher facilitated instructional workshops and team building activities. Teacher Teams Special Education Teachers will meet five times a year as a group to share best practice and embed differentiated learning activities for students in Resource Room and Co-Taught classrooms. Nov 2018, Jan 2019 and June 2019 Principal and SLC Assistant Principals 2018-19 CEP 27 Special Education teachers will have common prep periods with their co-teacher to plan and design lessons with student learning disabilities in mind. The English Language Learner teachers will have common prep periods with their co-teacher to plan and design lessons with student learning disabilities in mind. Parents will have the opportunity to engage in conversations with both the Special Education teacher and the General Education teacher during scheduled conferences. Workshops for these subgroups will also be provided during Family Advisory parent engagement nights. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use our Parent Coordinator, Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, and SLT to communicate with parents at intentionally planned Family Advisory Nights engagement events, and meetings to discuss what best practice teaching and learning looks like at the Queens High School of Teaching. Additionally, we will offer SLCs and GLTs "parent engagement grants" of per-session and supply funds to bring parents in and discuss student performance, and how to support improvement at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher teams will be programmed to meet three times/wk for an hour each meeting Team Building organization will be leveraged to facilitate activities Skedula will be purchased to provide teacher teams with real time student data to support action planning Coaches from CPET will support Grade Level Team Facilitators and GLTs in the work of job-embedded professional learning and inquiry. Peer Collaborative Teachers will support teams with professional learning experiences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 28  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Principal will meet with Assistant Principals to monitor progress of grade level team meetings Principal will also meet with all grade teams in January 2019 to get feedback about grade level team work Assistant Principals will meet weekly with Teacher Team Leaders to discuss progress and share best practice. Additionally, scholarship reports and teacher team artifacts, which include samples of student work and professional development connected to our instructional focus, will be reviewed three times a semester to ensure teams are making progress toward the goal. Additionally we will use our PCT Teacher Leaders and IEP teacher to support grade level teams with this work. We will create an internal survey connected to best practice standards of horizontal professional team work to be administered mid year in February 2019 to all teacher members of Grade Level Teams.. Additionally, we will engage in a mid year review including our partners at Teacher's College using the Quality Review Rubrics - a mock SQR, by March 2019, with a strong focus on indicator 4.2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade Level teams will submit artifacts to Small Learning Community Assistant Principals. At leadership meetings, Principal will facilitate a monthly protocol to assess whether the work of grade level teams are aligned to school wide instructional goals. Scholarship reports will be reviewed for teams at the end of each marking period to assess whether progress is being made toward the benchmark. Advance ratings for 3c will also be reviewed to assess whether students are meta-cognitively engaged in classroom learning activities. Additionally, GLTs will gather their own assessment data through the use of formative assessments in their classrooms to support their demonstrated success with leveraging student improvement through their Disciplined Collaboration Job-Embedded Professional Learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Leadership Meetings - School leadership meet weekly for two and a half hours to discuss progress toward school wide goals. The leadership meetings allow for instructional alignment across the three SLCs. When school wide issues arise, it’s important to get the input of teachers in each GLT in each SLC so everyone has input in school wide decision making. Assistant Principals from each SLC gather feedback from GLT facilitators and present teacher feedback during these leadership meetings. This allows the principal and the leadership team to gather multiple perspectives and make an informed decision. One area of our work that needs improvement is the norming of our 3 SLC APs in line with the principal and the Danielson Rubric with respect to MOTP ratings to ensure equitable evaluation and high standards of teaching and learning across all SLC classrooms. To evaluate progress in this area we will use data sources including the NYCDOE School Teacher Survey and Internal teacher survey report data, internal teacher measures including MOTP data, the School Quality Review, and feedback from central-led reviewers including feedback from our TDEC during JESA visits, and Superintendent and PLF during PPO visits. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a school, MOTP ratings will be more effectively normed across all 3 SLC APs and to the principal, using the Danielson rubric. During internal norming visits and JESA visits facilitated by our TDEC, teacher evaluation ratings will be within one rating score across evaluators. Additionally, we will have engaged in 1 full cycle of observation (all QHST teachers will have been observed at least one time) including the respective SLC AP leader and the member of our QHST leadership team with the most content area expertise - for example, each SLC AP will conduct one observation of each of their math teachers in collaboration with our QHST APO - our math licensed ad experienced school leader. By June 2019, all QHST cross SLC content area teachers will have received at least one formal observation with Danielson aligned feedback from the school administrator who is licensed and expert in that content area, and all QHST Assistant Principals will have engaged in at least 15% of their total observations conducted with another member of the leadership team utilizing a norming protocol. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Principal will meet with all grade level and content teams at the beginning of the year to share student performance data and establish shared instructional goals. This information will be shared with instructional coaches and SLC APs who will offer targeted support aligned to shared goals. - A newsletter called the Principal Information Sheet will be distributed to all staff members on a weekly basis. This newsletter will clearly define and celebrate best practice teaching and learning aligned to Danielson for all teachers in all classrooms. - Each SLC Assistant Principal will share documented reflections from the previous year and collaborate with teachers on setting new goals for their professional growth and learning in September. - Our ELL teacher will provide support with teacher teams who require support with ELL intervention strategies. A special education teacher will also be part of every teacher team and will support general education teachers with developing capacity around interventions associated with SWDs. - The Principal and Assistant Principals will conduct collaborative walkthroughs and debriefs to norm ratings, evaluate content specific teaching and curriculum, and evaluate professional practice. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and SLC APs Sept and Oct 2018 Principal All school based staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals, Grade Level Teams, and Content Teams Sept Assistant Principals 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher teams Teachers and SLC APs Sept 2018 – June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 31  We will use our Parent Coordinator, Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, and SLT to communicate with parents at intentionally planned Family Engagement Events, and meetings to discuss what best practice teaching and learning looks like at the Queens High School of Teaching. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. One Assistant Principal Organization and three Assistant Principals will oversee all programs and Small Learning Communities. Four Guidance Counselors – one per each of the three Small Learning Communities and a Cross Community College Guidance Counselor Team Facilitator for each grade team for each community and horizontal content team facilitator will be selected. PCTs will support the team leaders with professional learning supports and resources. Content Coaches from CPET will also liaison between teacher teams and school leadership, where applicable. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Principal will facilitate a 3 hour weekly meeting with each of the Small Learning Community(SLC) APs to share resources, best practice and assess progress. Principal will also attend these meetings. SLC APs will meet with Team Facilitators of teacher teams to gauge progress around this goal. Principal, SLC APs, Teachers and Instructional Coaches will engage in collaborative walk-throughs to monitor and norm MOTP ratings and understanding of best practice teaching and learning. By February 2019, using internal survey data, teachers will identify consistency across evaluators within competencies and MOTP observation data reports will demonstrate alignment across evaluators within competencies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 32  Danielson MOTP ratings Spring SLC Quality Reviews Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We continue to have a wonderful partnership with our Parent Teacher Association. School Leadership is represented at every meeting and we collaborate with the PTA Executive Board. Our annual school Leadership breakfast and collaboration with local partners such as the Samuel Field Y, allows all of our community partners and leaders the opportunity to gather together to reflect on our partnerships and celebrate the many accomplishments that have resulted from the collaborations. We continue to have a high percentage of parents who are satisfied (95% as per School Survey Data) with the school community. Our cohort instructional model centered around personalization and distributive counseling by advisors creates a sense of community amongst our students. Students have a strong connection to the school through the various extended day programs we offer (29 PSAL Sports Teams, Extended Clubs and Activities, College Now courses, Partnerships with St. Johns, Adelphi, At Home in College and Queens College). With all of these programs, we would like to improve the level of parent outreach and communication. This area of the school survey is at about the city average and we would like to improve the level of communication with parents around our instructional programs and progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase the Outreach to Parents section of the Framework for Great Schools Report Card by 2%. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  We will hire a parent coordinator to support progress Parents Sept toward our goal. The parent coordinator will work with administrators, teachers, Parent Teacher Association to ensure we maximize opportunities to involve families.  Our new Google GSuite Website will go live  We will continue to use SKEDULA, an online grading tool available to students and families as our gradebook and means of communicating with parents. All teachers will update SKEDULA at least ~ 1 time per week for all students.  We will continue to use School Messenger to share important information regarding events. Additionally, a Fall and Spring Parent Newsletter will be shared with all families that lists important dates and updates.  We will also host parent outreach nights which include Freshmen Orientation, Senior Night, Junior Night, Financial Aid Night, Students with Disabilities post Secondary options Night, and Parent Workshops at PTA meetings. We will implement out new initiative of monthly Family Advisory Nights. Assistant Principal Organization and Principal Parent Coordinator and AP Organization Assistant Principal Organization, Guidance Counselors and AP Guidance 2018 – January 2019 Sept 2018 Parents, Students and Staff Teachers and Students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Students and Families Sept 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal Organization, Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  We will use our Parent Coordinator, Leadership Team, PTA Executive Board, and SLT to communicate with parents at intentionally planned Family Engagement Events, and meetings. We will ask families for feedback around how to improve in this area and exceed our goal through formative surveys and informal conversations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Skedula software Working Technology in each classroom Alumni Mentors Guidance Counselors School Messenger Google GSuite Parent Coordinator Partners at WEDIKO and SFY Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent Coordinator will keep logs of parent attendance during parent engagement events and SKEDULA use. By February 2019, we aim to have increased the number of parents registered on SKEDULA by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used will be SKEDULA, School Messenger, PCAR, paper sign in sheets and Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, tutoring and one to one Before or After School Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Classroom Teacher makes determination and provides incentive for students to attend AIS Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The Academic Intervention Extended School Day program was designed to help students achieve the highest levels of success in their academic classes. Three days a week, teachers are available to provide support, guidance, and feedback to students while they engage in work. The program provides students with a forum to ask questions, gain increased understanding of material, complete assignments, revise assignments, and/or review for exams. One of the goals of the AIS is to help students develop their own study groups of teachers and learners, and create an environment where students help themselves and learn from one another. 2018-19 CEP 37  SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops will supplement our students’ classroom acquisition of the skills and content knowledge necessary to meet and exceed the standards necessary to achieve success on the NYS Regents Exams. Courses begin in November in preparation for the January exams and in May for preparation for the June exams. Facilitators, dates, times, and rooms will be announced in line with the timeframes mentioned above. ARISTA Student Tutors Schedule coordinated before/after school and during student lunches Books & Brains (B & B) Peer Tutoring program which meets three times a week ( Tuesday, Wednesday, & Thursday) Science and Math tutoring by the teachers in 9 th , 10 th , and 11 th grade (just math) during lunch. M&M will begin after the Thanksgiving 2018-19 CEP 38 Small group, tutoring and one to one Before or After School Mathematics Classroom Teacher makes determination and provides incentive for students to attend AIS break during lunch hours – 12:30 to 1:15 In-class peer tutors assist in 9 th grade math, science and Spanish classes The Academic Intervention Extended School Day program was designed to help students achieve the highest levels of success in their academic classes. Three days a week, teachers are available to provide support, guidance, and feedback to students while they engage in work. The program provides students with a forum to ask questions, gain increased understanding of material, complete assignments, revise assignments, and/or review for exams. One of the goals of the AIS is to help students develop their own study groups of teachers and learners, and create an environment where students help themselves and learn from one another. SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops will 2018-19 CEP 39  supplement our students’ classroom acquisition of the skills and content knowledge necessary to meet and exceed the standards necessary to achieve success on the NYS Regents Exams. Courses begin in November in preparation for the January exams and in May for preparation for the June exams. Facilitators, dates, times, and rooms will be announced in line with the timeframes mentioned above. ARISTA Student Tutors Schedule coordinated before/after school and during student lunches Books & Brains (B & B) Peer Tutoring program which meets three times a week ( Tuesday, Wednesday, & Thursday) Science and Math tutoring by the teachers in 9 th , 10 th , and 11 th grade (just math) during lunch. M&M will begin after the Thanksgiving break during lunch hours – 12:30 to 1:15 In-class peer tutors assist in 9 th grade 2018-19 CEP 40  Science Classroom Teacher makes determination and provides incentive for students to attend AIS Small group, tutoring and one to one Before or After School math, science and Spanish classes The Academic Intervention Extended School Day program was designed to help students achieve the highest levels of success in their academic classes. Three days a week, teachers are available to provide support, guidance, and feedback to students while they engage in work. The program provides students with a forum to ask questions, gain increased understanding of material, complete assignments, revise assignments, and/or review for exams. One of the goals of the AIS is to help students develop their own study groups of teachers and learners, and create an environment where students help themselves and learn from one another. SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops will supplement our students’ classroom acquisition of the skills and content knowledge necessary 2018-19 CEP 41  Social Studies Classroom Teacher makes determination and provides incentive for to meet and exceed the standards necessary to achieve success on the NYS Regents Exams. Courses begin in November in preparation for the January exams and in May for preparation for the June exams. Facilitators, dates, times, and rooms will be announced in line with the timeframes mentioned above. ARISTA Student Tutors Schedule coordinated before/after school and during student lunches Books & Brains (B & B) Peer Tutoring program which meets three times a week ( Tuesday, Wednesday, & Thursday) Science and Math tutoring by the teachers in 9 th , 10 th , and 11 th grade (just math) during lunch. M&M will begin after the Thanksgiving break during lunch hours – 12:30 to 1:15 In-class peer tutors assist in 9 th grade math, science and Spanish classes The Academic Intervention Extended School Day program was Small group, tutoring and one to one Before or After School 2018-19 CEP 42  students to attend AIS designed to help students achieve the highest levels of success in their academic classes. Three days a week, teachers are available to provide support, guidance, and feedback to students while they engage in work. The program provides students with a forum to ask questions, gain increased understanding of material, complete assignments, revise assignments, and/or review for exams. One of the goals of the AIS is to help students develop their own study groups of teachers and learners, and create an environment where students help themselves and learn from one another. SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops SLC’s NYS Regents Preparation Workshops will supplement our students’ classroom acquisition of the skills and content knowledge necessary to meet and exceed the standards necessary to achieve success on the NYS Regents Exams. Courses begin in November in 2018-19 CEP 43  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance Counselors provide mandated counseling as well as walk in counseling. Advisors for students also practice distributive counseling with students. preparation for the January exams and in May for preparation for the June exams. Facilitators, dates, times, and rooms will be announced in line with the timeframes mentioned above. ARISTA Student Tutors Schedule coordinated before/after school and during student lunches Books & Brains (B & B) Peer Tutoring program which meets three times a week ( Tuesday, Wednesday, & Thursday) Science and Math tutoring by the teachers in 9 th , 10 th , and 11 th grade (just math) during lunch. M&M will begin after the Thanksgiving break during lunch hours – 12:30 to 1:15 In-class peer tutors assist in 9 th grade math, science and Spanish classes Each of our Small Learning Communities Guidance Counselors has a Guidance Counselor in place to provide at risk services. Additionally, grade level teams provide personalized wrap around One to One During the school day 2018-19 CEP 44  interventions through advisory and parent outreach. If necessary, student advisors, grade level teams and/or GCs reach out for additional support from our school 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have ~5 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46 We are looking to provide school supplies and if necessary, basic/emergency supplies and clothing for students in temporary housing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4,154 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 49  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 50   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 52 N/A N/A N/A II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Queens High School of Teaching Borough Queens School Number 566 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ean Corrado Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alyssa Abraham Teacher/Subject Area Tova Daneshrad/Math Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Berthel/Math Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Cindy Kontente Coach School Counselor Monica Sampedro Parent Chante Thomas Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1090 2018-19 CEP 54 Total number of ELLs 21 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to assess the ELLs' literacy skills, Scantron's Performance Series computer-adaptive diagnostic test will be given. This assessment provides information about students' abilities to comprehend and interact with long passages, fiction, non-fiction, and varied vocabulary as a means of determining their Lexile levels. These levels can be tracked throughout the school year as the test is periodically administered. Students will then take an end of year assessment which provides data on how student achievement has progressed within the current school year and allows for year-to-year comparison and analysis. Additionally, students will be prompted to provide a writing sample at the beginning of the school year that will be used to gather data for planning instruction around writing. These writing samples are typically based on a non-fiction text, and ask students to respond to and cite the text as a means of developing their own claims and reasoning. Writing samples will be collected from the students throughout the course of the year in order to continually assess the impact of instruction and how it could be adjusted in order to better meet the needs of the students. 2018-19 CEP 55  In order to appropriately evaluate ELLs in their home languages, our school utilizes the Spanish LAB or teachers and other support staff who are literate in that student’s home tongue. These individuals orally assess these students. They may also assess these students’ literacy skills by having the student read an excerpt from a book in the students’ language, which might be available in the school library. A short writing sample on a simple task as “What is your favorite season?”, is utilized to assess the students’ writing ability. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data collected from both the Performance Series and the writing samples will be shared with grade teams to improve literacy instruction. The information from the former assessment is useful in assigning texts in literature circles or in forming groups. The writing sample provides the ENL teacher with an indication of specific writing strategies that need to be addressed. As a result, ENL instruction and content area instruction focuses on authentic literacy and ample opportunities for reading and writing instruction. As the ENL teacher and various content area teachers meet to collaborate and co-plan, this knowledge of students' reading and writing abilities is utilized in content area classrooms as a means of providing ELLs with appropriate scaffolding and support. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is based on several elements. The NYSESLAT scores and Regents provide us with some information on how are students are faring. Results of the Performance Series assessment and writing samples for the ELLs are retained from year to year to be able to look at qualitative data and student growth. The Performance Series also provides the school with reports regarding students' overall gains throughout the course of the year, which allows us to have a deeper understanding of the literacy levels of our students. In addition, ongoing conversations with the students and their parents on how our programs are serving their needs or the needs of their children are critical. With regard to students' performance in writing, samples are collected in student writing portfolios so progress (both throughout the school year and across school years) can be tracked. Students, teachers, and parents are able to see students' progress and areas of needs as instruction continues throughout the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? With the data collected from multiple sources of data (NYSESLAT, Regents exams, Performance Series, writing portfolio), strategies and interventions to address students' areas of need are implemented in the classroom. Assessment of students' knowledge and skills occurs on a daily basis in the classroom through discussions, the reading of texts, written responses, and exit tickets. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RtI begins with examining student data from multiple sources such as the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Regents/state assessments, and ongoing, in-class formative assessments, in order to ascertain what students' strengths and needs are with regard to the instruction of language, content, and skills. Once this data is gathered and analyzed, instruction is planned and implemented in order to support the majority of students' needs in the classroom. Instruction at this level (Tier 1) focuses on the most apparent needs of the class as a whole, and emphasizes productive collaboration between students, using paired, group, and whole class discussions to further question and investigate, and fostering personal connections between content, language, and background knowledge to help provide meaningful learning experiences for the students. Depending on the learning goal for the lesson, differentiation occurs through student grouping, the use of leveled texts/materials, and the choice of final product. For students who require further support (Tier 2 & Tier 3 interventions), their specific struggles with the language modalities, content, and skills, are analyzed in order to more precisely target their areas of need. These students are then provided with further differentiation that help to scaffold their development in these areas. At this level, students may be provided with more use of home language if deemed helpful (for example, an increased use of translated vocabulary, 2018-19 CEP 56  alternative/translated texts, and electronic dictionaries). The intensity of these interventions is dependent upon progress monitoring - if students are making sufficient progress in their areas of need, there is no need to increase the intensity, but if students are still struggling, Tier 2 interventions are adjusted to provide students with even more targeted support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Across grade levels, almost equal amounts of ELLs in this school tested at either the Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding proficiency levels. Currently, we have no students that tested at any other level. Additionally, when examining the four language modality scores, students generally scored higher in speaking and listening than reading and writing, even across grade levels. According to the data, the weakest area for students was writing. Based on this data, it is clear that the ELLs in this school require further support in developing their literacy skills, and English reading and writing abilities. Data from middle school ELA assessments is also used to determine whether incoming freshmen tested below standard and need additional support. These students are programmed for a Literacy Workshop class that focuses on specific skills and strategies that would help them build foundational skills in the areas of reading and writing. When analyzing the information provided by the EDAT, the school is able to better understand how much progress the ELL population has made over time, both as a group and as individuals. Areas of support, with regard to students' English language development, progression towards graduation, attendance rate, and long-term ELL status, are able to guide the ENL program when choosing curriculum and planning what content and skills should be emphasized in instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Information is reciprocally shared between the ENL teacher, grade teams, and guidance counselors through meetings, emails, and co-planning sessions. This helps to ensure that students are receiving proper support in their classes and helps to determine whether interventions are working or if adjustments need to be made to instructional strategies and interventions being implemented. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated and standalone ENL are heterogeneous and separated into two contiguous bands: 9-10 and 11-12 (in order to comply with New York State regulations for ELLs). Students who are identified as ELLs are placed in the school's Free-Standing ENL Program as per Parent Option. Students are programmed for ENL support for the required number of minutes as per their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores and as mandated by CR Part 154.2. The classes are mixed-grade and mixed-level. The curriculum is differentiated in terms of content, process, and product to address the needs of heterogeneously grouped students. Due to this unique organization, we are able to be in compliance with the mandated hours for each student. In keeping with QHST philosophy, ENL classes are inquiry-based and differentiated to address the specific language needs of students. The ENL teacher uses the scores on the NYSESLAT, as well as diagnostic and ongoing assessments to group students and to inform instruction. The AP and the ENL teacher review schedules to ensure students are receiving the correct number of minutes of stand alone and integrated. All Integrated ENL classes are co-planned and co-taught by both a content area teacher and ENL teacher. In these classes, content, skills, and language acquisition are emphasized so that ELLs and mainstream students progress in all 2018-19 CEP 57  areas. Stand-alone ENL classes are instructed solely by the ENL teacher in order to develop students' English language as a means of supporting their progress in content area classes. In both types of classrooms, texts, groupings, process, and product are all differentiated in order to meet the individual needs of students, based on their current knowledge, skills, and background. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed for ENL support for the required number of minutes as per their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores and as mandated by CR Part 154.2. Students will receive the instructional minutes of ENL as outlined in the program model (see chart below). The AP and the ENL teacher review schedules to ensure students are receiving the correct number of minutes of stand alone and integrated. .5 unit of study per week of INTEGRATED ENL in ELA/Core Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. The instructional approaches and methods include the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model, Expediting Comprehension for English Language Learners (Ex-CELL) strategies to facilitate instruction and lessons, and strategies obtained at ELLs/SWDs workshops and other ENL workshops. Content area and ENL lessons are aligned to the CCLS and NYS learning standards. A variety of SIOP components are utilized in our program, as can be seen in the following list: the use of learning objectives, leveled texts, graphic organizers to scaffold both reading and writing; explicit connections to background knowledge fostered through the use of anticipation guides, brainstorming, and KWLs; front-loading with vocabulary and new concepts; read alouds and think alouds; scaffolding through guided note-taking, Cornell notes, and GIST/talkback annotation strategies; student collaboration through think-pair-shares, scaffolded group/whole class discussions; and formative assessments through exit slips, whip-arounds, and class share-outs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We provide interpretation services to effectively evaluate students in their home language. New Spanish speaking entrants who tested into the school's ENL program via the NYSITELL are administered the Spanish LAB to measure their literacy level in the home language. An understanding of a student's proficiency in their home language can be developed through discussion with both the student's family and the student. Ongoing conversations around topics such as the student's previous educational experiences, use of language at home, amongst friends, and at school, the types of reading and writing done in other languages, and the student's views on the languages they know, can help to provide the ENL teacher with a better idea of the student's home language proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 58  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As of now, QHST has 1 ELL that are also classified as a Student with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). SIFE are supported in a number of ways. They are assigned student buddies that speak their respective languages. This student also has a bilingual paraprofessonal that supports him. We also provide teacher mentors, if possible from the same countries as the students. In this case, the paraprofessional is the student's mentor. Students and their parents will be directed toward support services in their home languages. Since the drop-out rate is much higher for SIFE, we have built a very supportive environment at QHST for these students, in order to respond to their social, cultural, and linguistic needs. QHST offers an extended school day, extended school year, and online classes for students to gain additional credits. In addition, the ENL teacher regularly meets with students for extra-help sessions when students are identified by their teachers and themselves as struggling. This flexible scheduling assists SIFE in becoming successful. There are many interventions we provide for SIFE. Sheltered instruction is one particular method. Through this method, English language instruction is modified so that the academic material is more comprehensible. Visuals are also an integral part of sheltered instruction, along with the use of group activities and demonstrations. SIFE are provided with an age-appropriate intensive literacy curriculum that targets phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. They are exposed to print-rich text that incorporates content language. Since most SIFE lack basic skills, they need specific instruction in tasks such as note-taking or using a dictionary. SIFE, as all ELLs, benefit from activating schema which also stimulates student motivation. These students are engaged with manipulatives and technology. Home language support is provided through the use of bilingual texts and/or dictionaries. SIFE need to be assessed frequently in order to check if they comprehend the subject matter. Finally, SIFE are given multiple methods of demonstrating comprehension. Role plays, drawings, explanations, and diagrams have proven to be very effective. Some of our ELLs who need extension of services (4-6 year ELLs) are not meeting requirements in reading. Students requiring additional support in reading are presented daily with print-rich text. The variety of text includes poetry, fiction and non-fiction text, as well as informational, public, and functional documents. Students are engaged with text through read-alouds and shared reading experiences. The primary purpose of these strategies is to model fluency. Furthermore, these techniques serve as an avenue to model skills, strategies, and reading habits which the students will have an opportunity to practice. Students participate regularly in partner reading and practice the modeled skills and/or strategies. Vocabulary development is enhanced through direct vocabulary instruction, ongoing vocabulary lists, and through the use of visuals. In addition, all ELLs attend a Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) class daily. During DEAR, skills and strategies are further reinforced. The other ELLs requiring extension of services are not making achievements in writing. All ELLs engage in free writes and quick writes regularly. Students requiring additional support in writing are supported through writing projects in various genres that align with the Common Core Learning Standards and New York State learning standards. The writing projects are scaffolded with the use of graphic organizers. Students generate ideas for their writing from different sources of information (such as texts, articles, videos, graphics, etc.) and their own experiences. Additionally, students are presented with model writing pieces and are encouraged to mimic text. Writing tasks are graded with rubrics that are specific to each assignment. Writing is further supported through writing conferences and peer editing. The ELLs that are in the U.S. for 0-3 years are instructed similarly to the two sub-groups described above. A tremendous amount of authentic literacy is provided for these students. Additionally, newcomer ELLs are supported through the use of bilingual dictionaries and home language texts. These students are encouraged to take Regents examinations in their respective languages. The ENL teacher collaborates with the content area teachers in order to increase student achievement for the ELLs. Long-Term ELLs are instructed with many of the same interventions as the ELLs receiving instruction for 4-6 years. Content 2018-19 CEP 59  area is a prime focus for these ELLs. Additionally, these students are provided with ongoing Regents preparation classes. QHST offers an extended school day, extended school year, and online classes for these students to gain additional credits. ELLs identified as special needs receive ELL instruction as per their Individualized Education Plans (IEP). In the ELL classes, they are provided with individualized instruction. Attempts are made to engage them with their peers, especially those of similar backgrounds. For these students, the IEP data informs the instruction. Through collaboration with the Special Education teacher, content area teachers, and paraprofessionals, the ENL teacher works to improve their language ability. Former ELLs are supported with additional ENL instruction with supports similar to those that Expanding students receive. They continue to receive all of the testing accommodations. Teachers are aware of who these students are and continue to support them with differentiated strategies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as special needs receive ENL instruction as per their Individualized Education Plans (IEP). In the ENL classes, they are provided with individualized instruction. Attempts are made to engage them with their peers, especially those of similar backgrounds. For these students, the IEP data informs the instruction. Through collaboration with the Special Education teacher, content area teachers and paraprofessionals, the ENL teacher works to improve their language ability. Teachers of ELLs are encouraged to support students with the strategies outlined in Question # 5. Our ELLS-SWDs fall into all of the categories outlined above. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? If ELLs are identified as needing more supports, the appropriate steps are taken to conduct an evaluation. Our ELLs are supported with SETSS classes, and/or in ICT classrooms, and with ENL instruction. Extra-help is provided by the ENL teacher for students that are identified as needing additional support so that these students are able to achieve their IEP goals and be successful on Regents exams. The SPED teachers engage in ongoing professional development to assist them in supporting their students. These teachers also turnkey the information to the content teachers. Within the ICT classrooms that the ENL teacher co-teaches in, the content area teacher, special education teacher, and ENL teacher collaborate together to identify what areas ELL-SWDs need support in. Once these areas have been identified, all three co-teachers participate in planning and implementing instruction. The focus of this instruction includes providing these students with support in language development as they develop content knowledge and specific skills. Outside of the classroom, the ENL teacher participates in IEP meetings for ELL-SWDs, where they provide feedback with regard to how students are progressing, as well as provide input on the student's IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Throughout the school year, ELLs receive age and grade appropriate language support through daily Drop Everything and Read sessions, lessons that are differentiated on the basis of students’ learning styles and individual needs, and a strong advisory program that fosters social and emotional growth through communication and community-building activities. ELLs are provided with graphic novels, audio books, and adapted/abridged versions of texts to support them in the ELA classroom. Additionally, alternate texts are provided to support the material they are learning in their content area classes. These interventions are targeted towards SIFE students, newcomer, developing, long-term, and former ELLs - specifically those that struggle with reading and are having difficulties in their content area classes due to language barriers. All ELLs, including former ELLs are given time and half on all of their classroom examinations, as well as Regents exams. The former ELLs are given a letter at the beginning of the school year informing their parents that they are eligible for transitional ENL services. These students are also discussed at grade team meetings. Home language support is provided through texts in 2018-19 CEP 60  the students’ languages, along with bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Below is a list of targeted intervention services by core content area: ELA: graphic novels, audio books, translated versions of books/texts, bilingual dictionaries, graphic organizers to scaffold reading and writing activities, differentiation (of assignments formats and through grouping, leveled texts, instruction in annotation strategies (GIST/talkback) Math: graphic organizers, leveled questioning, use of manipulatives, differentiation (through grouping), bilingual dictionaries, guided notes, cooperative learning groups/roles Social Studies: leveled and alternative texts, building background knowledge through the use of images and videos, pre-teaching vocabulary before examining primary and secondary sources, graphic organizers for reading and writing, guided notes, cooperative learning groups/roles, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries Science: graphic organizers for reading and writing, leveled texts and questions, response through writing/drawing, guided notes, cooperative learning groups/roles, use of manipulatives, pre-teaching vocabulary, concept maps, activating/connecting to prior knowledge through images and videos, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we will begin using Scantron's Performance Series diagnostic test (as discussed above) and the ENL teacher will continue to support the content area teachers in utilizing ENL strategies for effective instruction. Based on previous years' NYSESLAT results, as well as ELA Regents results, ELLs struggle in both reading and writing. Using Scantron's diagnostic test will provide the school with more data regarding what ELLs' areas of needs are so that more targeted instruction focusing on reading and writing can occur in the classroom. The end goal is that with the development of these skills, students will be able to transfer these abilities to their content area classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged by their ENL teacher and other teachers to participate in clubs and on sports teams. Announcements are made in the cafeteria regularly and by the students' advisers which inform the students of programs and services. Additionally, this information is shared in Advisory. Examples of academic-related clubs that ELLs are encouraged to attend are M&M, B&B, and the ENL Club, all of which provide students with extra-help for their classes. Additionally, through the school's partnership with Queens College, ELLs are encouraged to participate in Queens College's College Now and other pre-college programs, specifically those geared towards ELLs and English language instruction. The purpose of encouraging ELLs to participate in all of these activities is so that they can further develop their social and academic language skills, receive further support academic support that they may require due to language barriers and differences in prior education, and to support their college-and-career readiness. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We will be utilizing Scantron's Performance Series diagnostic test as a means of assessing students' reading abilities throughout the year. The ENL teacher uses a variety of resources, both fiction and non-fiction, to support the students' language development. Videos, graphics, and images are provided to students in order to provide students with multiple and varied access points to the content. Content area materials are supplemented with texts at a lower reading level. Online translation services are used for lower proficiency students, as a supplement to English language texts. 2018-19 CEP 61  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home languages are supported through the use of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries and through texts in the students' languages. During the school's silent sustained reading period, students are encouraged to read books in both English and their home language in order to support the continued development of both. During classroom instruction, students are encouraged to make use of cognates (if possible) found within their home language and the English language. Additionally, students are encouraged to (either through the use of bilingual dictionaries, or their own home language abilities) write down translations of new vocabulary/concepts, to help reinforce connections between both languages. Often, students are provided with translations of new vocabulary in their home languages as well. as a means of scaffolding instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Throughout the school year, ELLs receive age and grade appropriate language support through daily Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) sessions, lessons that are differentiated on the basis of students’ learning styles and individual needs, and a strong advisory program that fosters social and emotional growth through communication and community-building activities. ELLs' ELA and ENL teachers provide students with assistance with choosing appropriate books that students can read at their independent reading levels during DEAR, whether they be fiction, non-fiction, graphic novels, hi-lo (high-interest, low-level), or in students' home language. The advisory program focuses on age-appropriate activities and discussions revolving around real-life and real-world issues that affect students and the community that they live in. In the ELA classroom, ELLs are provided with graphic novels, audio books and adapted/abridged versions of texts to support them. Additionally, alternate texts are provided to support the material they are learning in their content area classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, our building contains QHST and a D75 program, which are affiliated with each other. For the D75 students who can handle less restrictive environments, they are programmed into certain content area classes taught by QHST staff. In order to properly be supported in these inclusion classes, they are provided with a paraprofessional that helps to ensure their needs are being met. In the past, the ENL teacher has serviced D75 ELLs as a means of supporting their academic, linguistic, and socioemotional growth. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When new ELLs enter our school, they are invited to participate in the Summer Bridge program. The Summer Bridge program acquaints students with the school, it's structure, the community, and the school-wide expectations as students participate in activities that help entering students form bonds with each other. Many activities are led by already enrolled students, which provides new students with an older peer who can share their own experiences of what to expect. When ELLs enroll throughout the school year, they engage in activities with their Advisory. The Guidance Counselors and students' advisers are involved in these activities. Additionally, teacher-teams try to find at least one student in each of the ELL's classes that could provide support to that student. Ideally, both students are of the same linguistic background, but if that is not possible, then new ELLs are introduced to students who could help the ELL (both socially and academically) in an empathetic and understanding manner. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 62  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Multiple times throughout the school year, the core content area teachers meet with a content area coach, who provides teachers with resources, guidance, and support in meeting the needs of the school's mainstream, special education, and ENL students. Together, they examine student data from multiple sources, identify overall areas of growth, and design curriculum in order to meet students' varied needs in the classroom. The ENL teacher attends professional development sessions regularly targeted to improve ENL instruction. The ENL teacher attended a series of three workshops hosted by the NYC DOE’s Division of English Language Learners and Support Services, which focused on collaborating with content area teacher in order to support ELLs' language development in content area classrooms. Examples of professional development sessions that the ENL teacher has attended in the past include Collaboration and Co-Teaching Conference: Integrated Services for English Language Learners, Academic Research Rounds: Text Complexity, and a PD series entitled Collaborative Learning in the ENL Classroom. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher attends professional development sessions regularly targeted to improve ENL instruction. The ENL teacher attended a series of three workshops hosted by the NYC DOE’s Division of English Language Learners and Support Services, which focused on collaborating with content area teacher in order to support ELLs' language development in content area classrooms. The ENL teacher collaborates with all content area teachers in order to provide an optimum level of learning for these students. The ENL teacher attends grade team meetings and provides professional development and ENL training to all the teachers to discuss the ELL students’ strengths and areas in need of growth, as well as specific ENL strategies. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data is shared with all of the teachers, in order for the teachers to be aware of how each student scored in each of the four modalities. The ENL teacher supports them in using this data to inform their practice. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings/phone conferences will be scheduled by the ENL teacher. Interpretation and translation will be provided as needed through either school staff or the DOE's over-the-phone interpretation services. During these conferences, the ENL teacher provides parents with information regarding students' most recent NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results, students' strengths and areas of need (with relation to all language modalities, as well as content and skills), students' academic progress, how students are being supported within the school, and suggestions for support at home. The ENL teacher will keep 2018-19 CEP 63  accurate records of all correspondence between the school and the ELLs' families regarding outreach for these annual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. See below Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The Queens High School of Teaching opened its doors in September of 2003 and became the standard for progressive, student-centered, mixed-ability small learning communities in Queens. QHST is an educational option school created to provide the youngsters in the neighborhoods that comprise Districts 26 and 29 with a comprehensive high school in a small-school setting. At QHST, students get individual attention in small learning communities that practice the principles set forth by our educational partner organization, The Institute for Student Achievement (ISA). Our school is designed to accommodate 1,200 students within three small learning communities of 400 students each. Our school’s philosophy is in keeping with current educational research on the relationship between small schools and student success; each student is a member of an advisory which meets for 45 minutes per week and participates in Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) four times a week. As a school whose focus is on teaching, QHST provides all students the opportunity to become part of our Teaching Institute, where students learn pedagogy, observe classes and teach classes. The intimate family-like atmosphere at The Queens High School of Teaching creates a sense of community, eliminates student anonymity and promotes student support. The Queens High School of Teaching is located in Bellerose, a section of Queens that is ethnically and culturally diverse. Of the teachers permanently assigned to the Queens High School of Teaching, 100% are fully licensed. We have one fully-licensed ENL teacher and four certified foreign language teachers. The Queens High School of Teaching offers a complete and comprehensive menu of courses in all academic areas. All of our instructional programs are aligned with the New York State Learning Standards and aspects of the Common Core Learning Standards and are taught through the process of inquiry. Teachers receive ongoing professional development in the areas of inquiry and differentiation, provided by content area coaches in-house. These areas are at the core of our philosophy that students learn best in mixed-ability settings where the needs of individual learners are addressed. Since its opening in September 2003, QHST has assembled a number of viable committees consisting of educators, parents, and students all interested in designing and embracing programs that support student learning. Our school tone remains positive and is highlighted by a collaborative staff and the active involvement of parents, teachers and community members. Teachers are actively involved in writing new inquiry-based and interdisciplinary curricula, instruction and lessons that are aligned with the NYS Learning Standards and the Common Core Learning Standards and the special needs of our students. On our most recent quality review, we received a “well developed.” Our graduation rate is 91% and our attendance is over 91%. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ean Corrado, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Queens High School of Teaching School DBN: 26Q566 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ean Corrado Title Principal Cindy Kontente Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Alyssa Abraham ENL/Bilingual Teacher Chante Thomas Parent Tova Daneshrad Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Berthel Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Monica Sampedro School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q566 School Name: Queens H.S. of Teaching Superintendent: Elaine Lindsay The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alyssa Abraham Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Information regarding written and oral language preferences for the parent community is gathered from the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS, Student Emergency Contact cards, parent orientations, and from students themselves. All incoming students are required to complete the Home Language Survey. Aggregated HLIS results are used to assess school’s written translation and oral interpretations needs. In addition, through the parent orientation sessions, parents are surveyed and are identified for translation services. Advisors and Grade Level Teams also identify students who are in need of written translation and/or oral interpretation. The ENL teacher keeps track of these students and ensures that translation is available whenever it is needed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 67  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese (Any) Ewe French Gujarati Haitian Creole Hungarian Hindi Hausa Indonesian (AKA Bahasa) Italian Korean Mandarin Malayalam English 1 19 11 1 6 6 17 0 8 2 0 2 1 0 6 1452 Pilipino (AKA Tagalog) 4 Punjabi Romanian Russian Sinhalese Spanish Tamil Temne Urdu 43 1 2 1 81 2 2 17 0.06 1.13 0.65 0.06 0.36 0.36 1.01 0 0.47 0.12 0 0.12 0.06 0 0.36 86.17 0.24 2.55 0.06 0.12 0.06 4.81 0.12 0.12 1.01 1 19 10 1 4 6 26 1 9 2 1 2 1 1 7 0.06 1.13 0.59 0.06 0.24 0.36 1.54 0.06 0.53 0.12 0.06 0.12 0.06 0.6 0.42 1433 85.04 4 45 1 2 1 85 2 1 20 0.24 2.67 0.06 0.12 0.06 5.04 0.12 0.06 1.19 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 68  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Newsletters, Letters from Leadership, Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements, Regents Exam Letters These documents are distributed throughout the school year. plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Many standard announcements to be sent home can be found already translated on the DOE's Intranet, under "School Support". For other documents that need to be translated, they are prepared by the school, and emailed to the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. Ample time is provided for the translation unit to be able to translate the document before it is needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Freshmen Orientation, Parent Orientations (Content Areas) Fall interpretation service(s)? The school relies on its multilingual staff members that may speak the same language as families in order to provide interpretation services at face-2018-19 CEP 69  to-face meetings. If no staff member is available, then the school makes use of the DOE's over-the-phone interpretation services. Parent-Teacher Conferences Fall & Spring Same as above. Parent Orientations (ENL), Parent Intervention Meetings, & IEP Meetings When necessary throughout the year. Same as above. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school relies on its multilingual staff members that may speak the same language as families in order to provide interpretation services at face-to-face meetings. If no staff member is available, then the school makes use of the DOE's over-the-phone interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Pupil Personnel Services staff are provided with outside professional development to make them aware of the nature of working with limited English proficient families and students. In addition, both the ENL teacher and AP will help to ensure that resources are made available to school staff members with regard to both translation and interpretation services. The ENL teacher will provide further information on translation and interpretation services to staff at faculty meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Teachers will be informed of available services by the ENL teacher at Grade Level Team meetings, so that they can pass this information on to parents. The ENL teacher will communicate specifically with the ELLs and their families to ensure these supports are in place. Additionally, the PTA will communicate that these services are available at monthly PTA meetings. We will also share the Parents’ Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access. Both documents make parents aware of their rights to languages services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 70  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through both formal and informal meetings and communications (such as parent orientations, parent interventions, IEP meetings, phone calls, and email communications) with parents, the school staff gathers feedback regarding the quality and availability of services. Additional information with regard to improving home communication with LEP families can be gained through outreach and receiving information from the PTA at meetings. 2018-19 CEP 71 
