2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q600 School Name: QUEENS VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MELISSA BURG 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Queens Technical High School 24Q600 342400011600 9-12 School Number (DBN): 37-02 47 th Avenue, Long Island City , NY 11101 718-937-3010 718-392-8397 Phone Number: Fax: Melissa Burg Mburg2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Burg T. Raynor V. Colon L. Salas-Ocampo Maria Tenesaca NoorAayla Kimberly Mera T. McCoy District Information Geographical District: 24 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-3517 Phone Number: 718-281-3517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Burg Thomas Raynor Vivian Colon Maria Tenesaca NoorAayla Kimberly Mera Theresa McCoy Jessica Dimech Lisseth Salas-Ocampo VivianaCampos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ CSA Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dennis Whyte K. Goodluck OrlenaGrant LizbethMartinez Angelica Diaz NataliaMejia Member/ teacher Member/parent Member/parent Member/ student Member/ student Member/ student Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Queens Technical High School is committed to providing quality career and technical education. Our school offers standards-based instruction in both academics and career technical programs. Teaching and learning are delivered through an interdisciplinary approach and relate to real life experiences. Graduates possess the skills and character to succeed in all post-secondary environments. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Queens Technical High School currently has approximately 1,550 students and over 100 teachers. Our student demographics consist of 76% Hispanic, 10% Asian, 6% Black, and 7% White, 5% of our population is ELL, and 16% have special needs. Each year we improve and have reached a graduation rate at just over 80%. Since we are a CTE school, our vision statement, “All students can be college and career ready if given the proper preparation, training and support,” is completely accurate. This is what each individual in the building not only believes but brings to life here each day. Our school offers standards-based instruction in both academic and career-technical programs. Teaching and learning are delivered through an interdisciplinary approach and relate to real-life experiences. Graduates possess the skills and character to succeed in post-secondary environments. We have a very strong partnership that unites the school with our community. We work very closely with Sunnyside Community Center through a grant that provides our students and their families with free SAT prep, post-secondary training and college preparation assistance. This year they also were in-house providing supplements services such as tutoring, medical, mental health and extra curricula activities for students, parents and staff. We will also received a mental health center through a grant through Thrive NYC. Each of our Career and Tech Ed programs also partners with several local businesses and post-secondary education programs. Our school generates and maintains a strong sense of community, based on a foundation of mutual trust and respect. All members feel valued and vested. Our school is a safe place in which to teach and learn. Effective communication and positive connections define the relationship between and among staff and students. Each individual demonstrates accountability for his/her learning experience, and for the overall good of the community. Our school provides a caring and enriching environment that fosters emotional, social, intellectual, and physical development. Our students and staff demonstrate commitment to high experiences and a clear understanding of academic and behavioral standards of excellence. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have approximately 16% of our population with special education needs and 5% who are English language learners. We offer a full range of services from self-contained classes to SETSS and Beginner ENL classes to support classes. We also provide speech and counseling and contract out any occupational and physical therapy necessary. As with many students, these students require a variety of learning styles and multiple repetitions along with vocabulary support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Each subject area has created at least 4 common assessments that are aligned to the CCLA (5A) and teachers have had professional development to support students emotional needs (5B). My key area of focus this year will be around collaborative teachers (5C). We are moving from interdisciplinary teams to content area teams and with that adjustment will be the continuation of learning to utilize protocols to look at student and teacher work. This skill was started but not mastered in 2016-17. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q600 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1546 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 107 104 11 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 44 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.4% % Reduced Lunch 7.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 78.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 90% 84% 81.0% 10.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 135 143 73 90.3% 5.4% 16.9% 4.8% 11.2% 0.1% 14 13% 6.8 N/A N/A 92% 88% 86.1% 24% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, only 55% of students responded that in most or all of their classes, their teachers ask difficult questions in class and that they work in small groups. Additionally, 54% of students say that they are challenged in most or all of their classes. However, in 2017-2018 student responses went up 3% in the area of teachers asking difficult questions and 6% said they worked in small groups, and 3% more felt challenged in most or all of their classes. We will continue working on questioning and discussion as well as inquiry work focused around both formative and summative assessments. This will continue to better align teacher tasks and student abilities and improve student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 5% more observations will have an effective or highly effective rating in questioning and discussion techniques (3B). 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common Planning Time PD around CCLS, LDC and MDC, questioning and discussion, and assessment All Departments Inquiry teams will look at student and teacher work All Departments Parent meeting around CCLS and how to support your child Parents Professional Learning Fridays will be dedicated to analyzing the data behind the exams and looking for trends and anomalies. Teachers All Assistant principals and lead teachers All Department Assistant Principals, AP data and testing Parent coordinator AP Data and Testing September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 November 2018 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Small and large parent meetings run by the parent coordinator, guidance counselors, Department Assistant Principals, and/or community based organization. Resources will be sent home and posted on our website. This will happen throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources as well as instructional resources are necessary. Teachers will need to collaborate on content and format of meetings as well as bringing student and teacher work with them to share. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% rise in effective and highly effective ratings in 3B. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Observations, cabinet meetings, work with TDEC. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Looking at the 2016-2017 school quality guide, on 55% of students answered positively about questions in the area of personal attention and support. This is 6% below both the borough and city average. In a open forum with teachers, they noted that pushing students academically has left them less time to focus on students' social/emotional health. We have compensated by having our new CBO and mental health clinic support our students socially and emotionally and work with our teachers to help them support our students and themselves this year. We have seen an increase of 6% in the area of personal attention and support which is equal to the borough average, but still 2% below the city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher will have had at least 6 professional development sessions on culturally relevant education, behavior management, stress management and reduction and having a positive growth mindset. School survey and student survey will improve by 2% in these areas because of the training. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? professional development provided by NYCMT and CREAD staff Train up to 25 staff members on restorative justice practices. staff Individual, group, and family counseling in a variety of forms students Success Mentors students September 2018-June 2019 December 2018-January 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP PPS, AP ISS, departmental APs, outside consultant Principal, AP PPS, COSA,, CBO, deans, AP security, guidance counselors, select other staff Mental Health Providers of Western Queens Sunnyside Community Center 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Small and large parent meetings run by the parent coordinator, guidance counselors, and/or assistant principals. We will run classes on basic computer skills, setting up an e-mail address and how to navigate Skedula/Pupil Path in the beginning of the school year with tabling assistance to happen on open school night and afternoon. Discussion and assistance will be sought through the SLT mid-year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources and financial resources as well as appropriate instructional resources will be necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 16  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, staff will have had at least 3 professional developments around above topics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Students on the SLT will be polled and a mid-year survey will be given to all students. 70% of students will indicate they are "comfortable with most of their teachers". Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams continue to improve using protocols for inquiry work. they have relied on 2 main protocols. Next year, I would like to expand their repertoire to include at least 1 data protocol. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 Teacher teams will be able to competently utilize a variety of protocols around looking at teacher and student work products. Utilizing these protocols, teacher planning and instruction as well as student performance will improve. Student accumulation of 10+ credits in 10th and 11th grade will increase by 2%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development provided by administration and teacher leaders teachers observations of teachers teachers Student surveys to indicate the level and quality of feedback they receive in classes students Weekly - September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 February 2019 Department assistant principals, lead teachers, AP data , AP ISS Principal and assistant principals. AP data 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September and ending in June, small and large parent meetings run by the parent coordinator, guidance counselors, Department Assistant Principals, and/or community based organization at monthly parent association meetings. Resources will be sent home and posted on our website as provided at monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human and instructional resources will be necessary for the professional development and follow-through needed to accomplish this goal effectively . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  Progress will monitored by the principal. by February 2019, She will visit each department twice to observe the teams using protocols and provide feedback. Based on the quality review rubric, the principal and/or Superintendent will find that teacher teams will result in shared improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Principal and assistant principal observation and feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the data, we are very strong in this area. The one area I would like to see improved and it is implied in the School Quality guide is to empower more teachers and create more teacher leaders. We are 4% above the borough and citywide averages in this area on the school survey. Our lowest score, 76%, was teachers reporting that they have influence over policy in student behavior and in consultative counsel with the UFT chapter chair the teachers would like to form a professional development committee to assist in creating and delivering PD. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each department will have one teacher leader to assist with common planning time, inquiry work, and professional development within that department. In addition, a professional development committee will be formed and will develop and or deliver at least 1 professional development session to the entire staff by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Individual goal setting, walk-throughs, data reviews, and the creation of an action plan. assistant principals Planning and support meetings, data review, discuss trends, goal creation. teachers Principal Assistant principals September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in November and ending in June, PA and SLT will be informed of on-going events by principal or chairperson of SLT at monthly meetings . Resources will be sent home and posted on our website as created. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources with possible instructional and financial resources. Teachers will be the point persons and will need the materials, time and compensation for undertaking such positions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 2 observations of the team will show that the lead teacher is effective in his/her roll in making sure teachers have voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  School survey will indicate a 2% increase in having an influence over school policy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent attendance at meetings and events is an on-going challenge. It seems that we have approximately 10% of parents attend an event they are invited to and less than 1% of parents attend PTA Meetings. 2016-2017 started strong but ended weak. Even at our most important and usually well attended meetings, very few parents came out. Our parent coordinator creates programs especially designed with the parents in mind to draw them into the school such as computer classes or art classes. so parents are more comfortable partnering with the school on educational issues. In 2017-2018, we saw an increase at some but not all of our meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase family and community ties by hosting more events for parents/community members and having a 10% increased attendance as measured by sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Send surveys to parents regarding what they would like covered at meetings. parents Increase the amount of celebrations and events parents are invited to. School community Bring in guest speakers, community organizations and local businesses for parents School, families, community October 2018 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator School personnel CBO, parent coordinator, school personnel 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Small and large parent meetings run by the parent coordinator, guidance counselors, Department Assistant Principals, and/or community based organization. Resources will be sent home and posted on our website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources as well as capital resources are necessary. Also, coordinating schedules with and between all parties. Teachers will need to collaborate on content and format of assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly sign in sheets and planned activities will be monitored and compared to previous years. Work with SLT, PA and Parent Coordinator on how to increase parent engagement . Our plan is to have 200 active parents by February 2018-19 CEP 25  2019 which is the same number we had by June of 2017. Sign in sheets will be monitored and evaluated for parent consistency, activities parents come in for, and time of day best suited for maximum participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets at events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Entering the school as a level 1 or 2,failing a marking period, or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self referral Entering the school as a level 1 or 2,failing a marking period or semester, failing the regents or scoring below the college benchmark, teacher referral, parent or self referral Failing a marking period or semester of science or regents, not have the required lab count, teacher referral, parent or self referral Failing a marking period or semester of social studies or regents, teacher referral, parent or self referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring, additional support courses, free SAT prep courses, extra teacher support services, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole group, small group and 1 to 1 as necessary Before, during and after the school day as well as on Saturdays. Tutoring, additional support courses, free SAT prep courses, extra teacher support services Whole group, small group and 1 to 1 as necessary Before, during and after the school day as well as on Saturdays. Tutoring, make up labs, extra teacher support services Whole group, small group and 1 to 1 as necessary Before, during and after the school day as well as on Saturdays. Tutoring, additional support courses, extra teacher support services Whole group, small group and 1 to 1 as necessary Before, during and after the school day as well as on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP 27  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher, guidance counselor, administrator, parent or self-referral, change in grades, work habits or behavior Academic supports or counseling, emotional counseling, ISS referral, outside referral Whole group, small group and 1 to 1 as necessary Before, during and after the school day as well as on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide these students with supplies both for personal use and school as well as counseling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 100% of the faculty at Queens Technical High School is designated as highly qualified as defined by NCLB. When hiring, only highly qualified teachers will be considered. We look to hire from the DOE New Teacher Finder, hiring fairs, Teaching Fellows, recommendations from other staff members as well as resumes sent in to the school. In order to retain the staff we provide on-going PD both on site and off site throughout the school year. These professional development opportunities include: . DOE workshops . High Schools That Work professional development and conferences . Professional learning Fridays with teacher-led PD . Daily common planning time . Departmental meetings 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff receives on-going PD both on site and off site throughout the school year. These professional development opportunities include: . DOE workshops .Teacher-led PD . Professional learning Fridays . Daily common planning time 2018-19 CEP 31  . Departmental meetings Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We reviewed last year’s process and results as well as this year’s selection choices. The MOSL committee discussed what worked well, what needs to be improved, and how the MOSL could help us achieve our CEP goals. Teachers are working with the AP of Data and Testing to create common assessments that align to curriculum and lessons taught. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 32 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 4, 5A, 5E N/A 4, 5A, 5E N/A 4, 5A, 5E Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 747,822.00 0 11,200.00 0 8,379,385.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 33   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Queens Technical High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Queens Technical High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Queens Technical High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 37  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community Schools Strategy continues to provide supplemental support to existing curricula as well as new structures to the building. These include extended learning time, attendance supports, family engagement and health and wellness. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Expanded Learning Time (ELT) By June 2019, 50%--(25) participants in the cohort will be engaged in tutoring and or other initiatives and programs that support an improvement in academic self- efficacy.  Academic self-efficacy is defined as a student’s belief (conviction) that they can successfully achieve at a  designated level on an academic task or goal. Surveys will be used as qualitative data to show how the students are feeling towards their academics (self – efficacy). In addition, Community Schools will gather Quantitative data (grades, test scores, class, credits, etc.) to track how the students are performing in school.  Attendance will be monitored on a weekly basis using New Visions Student Sorter. Attendance By June 2019, (20) of cohort participants will show a 10 % improvement in their attendance rate from last year (2017 – 2018).  The Community Schools cohort will engage in an attendance improvement plan that will include the following interventions:  Bi-weekly, QT-OT (on-time) follow-up tracking cards that will be shared with students to remind them of their  weekly attendance and lateness patterns and how these areas impact their grades and ultimate graduation planning. Increasing engagement with families through calls, email, letters, workshops and QT-OT cards about the importance of school attendance, arriving on-time, and the resources/supports available at our community school.  Rewarding students who achieve perfect (no absences) or near perfect (less than 2 absences) attendance monthly. Posters with student’s names and their attendance achievement will be posted in a designated visible area identified by the principal of the school. Family Engagement  2018-19 CEP 42  By June 2019, 100% of cohort parents/guardians will be informed of program offerings through differentiating communication platforms (phone calls, email, flyers, letters, text notifications, meetings, etc.). 15% of cohort parents/guardians will attend at least 1 family engagement event.  Health and Wellness By June 2019, 100% of cohort students will be offered 1:1 or small group coaching; 100% of cohort referrals will receive follow-ups, 50% of cohort participants will participate in 1:1 or small group coaching sessions and/or at least 1 health & wellness or enrichment offering Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Meeting with staff from departments will be facilitated to assess gaps and needs of the school, in the areas of in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Tailored needs assessments will be developed to distribute to students and parents. Academic instructions will be tailored and integrated to provide support for the variegated needs of students. Meetings will be scheduled for students and parents to meet individually with staff to learn more information and enroll students into the Community School initiative. Community School staff will partner with the Community School Manager to use New Visions data sorter and Skedula – the QVTHS student database to analyze trends and patterns, targeting students who struggle with academics and attendance. Additional data provided to support program development will include surveys, needs assessments and journal articles. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Sunnyside CC Target Population grades 9-12 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Expanded learning time By June 2019, 50% of regularly attending participants in the cohort will be engaged in tutoring and or other initiatives and programs that support an improvement in academic self- efficacy. By June 2019, (40%) of cohort participants will show an improvement in their attendance rate from last year (2017 – 2018) showing 10% improvement. Sunnyside CC grades 9-12 attendance supports Sunnyside CC grades 9-12 family engagement By June 2019, 100% of cohort parents/guardian 2018-19 CEP 43  Sunnyside CC grades 9-12 health and wellness will be informed of program offerings; 15% of parents/guardians will attend at least 1 parent/guardian event. By June 2019, 100% of participants will be offered 1:1 or small group coaching. Of that number 50% will participate in 1:1 or small group coaching sessions and/or at least 1 Health & Wellness or enrichment offering. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff, work space for community school, private space for counseling, curriculum and activities for ELT, access to student data to track progress, embedding supports into student schedules, additional partnerships with recreational and educational groups for parents and students . Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 2018-19 CEP 44  4. 1. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process as well as other critically important coordinating activities through the following:  Connecting with other Community School leaders and assessing for best practices in the core service areas of the initiative  Along with the members of the School Leadership Team, identifying the needs of the students, families and  communities in each core service area of the initiative Identifying and actively working to problem-solve around areas of growth and recommendations from last year’s work around Community Schools  Expanding partnerships with outside resources to enhance program services 2. Meetings with staff from departments will be facilitated to assess gaps and needs of the school. 9th & 10th grade orientation and teacher orientation, happening at the end of August and beginning of September, respectively, will be the start of student and parent-facing interactions with potential program participants. During this time, Community School staff will discuss the program offerings of the Community School and distribute relevant documentation associated the program. After the 9th grade orientation, tailored needs assessments will be developed to distribute to students and parents. Academic instruction will be tailored and integrated to provide support for the varying identified needs of students. Students will be encouraged to more readily utilize program services. Knowing this, programming will be tailored to provide multiple means of engagement, representation and action and expression. Meetings will be scheduled for students and/or parents to 2018-19 CEP-CS come in and meet individually with a staff member to gather more information and enroll students into the Community School initiative. Community School staff will partner with the Community School Program Manager to use the New Visions Data Sorter the QVTHS student database to analyze trends and patterns, targeting students who are struggling with their academics and with attendance. 3. Family engagement will begin with an in-person meeting during the school’s orientation to discuss offerings and opportunities for engagement and will continue with a meeting with Community School staff to assess readiness and willingness to participate and remain engaged with the Community School. During the academic year, a number of activities will be provided to support parents in developing their leadership skills and supporting their children through their educational trajectory, both in and outside of the classroom. This support will consist of the following:  Western Queens Mental Health Clinic has opened a Mental Heath Prevention and Intervention Program (PIP) and Satellite Mental Health Clinic at Queens Technical High School. Services offered include individual, group and family therapy. Community School staff will make referrals to psychiatric services, case management services and student workshops on an as needed basis. 1. Katherine Ambia – On site Social Worker/program manager is Queens Technical High School’s contact person. Community School staff will assess the needs of students and families and make referrals as need to Western Queens.  On a bi-weekly basis, Community school Director and Program Coordinator will make phone calls and QT- OT mailing to parents informing parents of students’ absences after having initial dialogue with student. On a bi-weekly basis, Community school Director and Program Coordinator will make phone calls to inform parents of students’ attendance accomplishments  On a ongoing basis community school staff will sending letters home about workshops, services and events 2018-19 CEP 45  Community School Director with the support of school Parent Coordinator will develop and co-lead parent groups to help organize needed workshops and events.  Community School Staff will continually engage parents with programmatic activities through the year using various venues such as flyers, parent blasts, “Van” technology, letters etc. 4. Data will be entered, tracked and collected on a bi weekly basis for the following service areas:  Program staff will generate weekly reports to identify students who are struggling with attendance and communicate concerns to parents and individual teachers, and make phone calls, as needed. Support and referral services will be offered, as identified during this time. We will meet monthly with school leadership to report our progress with students and identify support services to best fit the needs of students. Community Schools will formulate observations and examine the impact of the data trends to determine what potential resources are needed for the students and their families. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students  This fall 2018 will mark Sunnyside Community Services second year of being based out of Queens Technical High School. The Community School initiative is one of four programs providing supportive services to the students and families of the high school. These programs are part of Youth Futures and programming includes college and career readiness services geared towards 11th and 12th grade students; and enrichment programming geared towards 9th and 10th grade students. Our Community School staff will work together with the school to refer students out to various services, as needed. Lisseth Salas-Ocampo, Assistant Principal of Queens Technical High School Shenica Odom, Deputy Director, High School Program Deputy Director at Queens Technical High School  Members of the Community School team include:  Melissa Burg, Principal of Technical High School    Theresa McCoy, Director of Community Schools at Queens Technical High School  Madeline Hatcher, Program Coordinator of Community Schools at Queens Technical High School  Keri Cerio, Program Manager, Office of Community Schools   Meetings will be held on a weekly basis and data around attendance, family engagements, academic Instructors for academic tutoring progress, health and wellness services and expanded learning time will be compiled and brought to the meeting to discuss trends and patterns for analysis. Next steps will be compiled around each of the core service areas and projections for outcomes will be re-worked and clarified, as needed. Meetings will also include highlighting moments of strengths of students, staff and core service areas. 3. Data will be collected according to provided Community School benchmarks, and will be collected on a bi weekly basis depending on service area. Students will be tracked on the New Visions Data Sorter and data will be monitored 2018-19 CEP 46  closely to work with students around best strategies to support their attendance and academics. This will be reported back to school leadership during weekly meetings, to discuss continuous support and offer holistic planning for the students. Collected data will be discussed in terms of alignment with projected outcomes. Data will be discussed to include analysis of trends and patterns and to enhance the processes of the Community School, if needed. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed to implement the Community School program include: Space to conduct private, confidential counseling sessions Staff (Community School Director, Social Worker and Program Coordinator)   Work space for Community School Director, Social Worker and Program Coordinator   Curriculum and program activities for expanded learning time  Access to student grade reports, to track academic progress  Embedding of Expanded Learning Time, group counseling or individual counseling appointments and academic tutoring into students’ schedules (both before, during and after the school day – whenever is necessary)  Partnerships with recreational groups and educational groups for parents and students Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-2019, program planning commenced in June 2018 with the CS Director, CBO and QTHS. The program will officially launch in late September and end in early June 2019. By early October, we expect to have fully integrated into the school’s academic department to support with the implementation of the CSs program offerings. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental programs will target our 10th and 11th grade ELL students. Our NYSESLAT data shows a shift in the performance of ELLs at our school. In the past the trend showed that 9th grade ELLs would tend to score Commanding on the NYSESLAT in May of their freshman year. 2018 NYSESLAT data shows that very few of our students are scoring Commanding. In 2017, 28% of ELLs scored Commanding and in 2018 only 8% of ELLs scored Commanding. Our students are remaining an ELL for much longer in our school. The total number of ELLs is increasing in our building from 113 in 2017-2018 to 129 in 2018-2019 but there is a drop in the number of freshman ELLs who are coming to our school. 84% of our ELLs are at the Expanding level but need support to become more proficient. In addition we have 4 students at the Emerging level (2 new Freshman and 2 students who dropped levels) who will need targeted academic supports. A total of 5 students dropped their levels and may require additional social/emotional supports as well as academic. 18% of our students moved up in proficiency level and/or exited with Commanding. The remaining 82% of our students stayed the same or dropped levels. These programs will try to address the needs of this group who are in danger of becoming long term ELLs in particular but will be available to all of our ELLs. We will take accurate attendance of students who attend these programs using sign in sheets and send notification of these programs in English as well as parents’ preferred language. Saturday Program This program will be taught by an ENL teacher who is bilingual Spanish/English and will provide services to 9-12 grade students and at some times, parents. This will take place for 2 sessions in the fall and 2 sessions in the spring for a total of 4 Saturdays during the school year from 8am-11 am. The size of the group will be between 10-20 students and parents. Students and parents will go on field trips to the Tenement Museum, NY Historical Society, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and other NYC locations. There will be a total of 2 trips per session for a total of 4 trips throughout the year. The student only afterschool classroom sessions before the trip will focus on vocabulary building appropriate for the field visit and the post sessions will focus on writing and presenting about the field visit. Teachers will utilize teaching resources from field trip sites and adapt them to teach vocabulary and writing. The parents are incorporated in this program to work with the ENL teacher as she models ENL strategies with students on the trip that parents can practice with their own child in the home language or English. Afterschool Program These programs will be held at different times throughout the school year for our ninth through twelfth grade students. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Our Drama for ELLs program will run for 8 weeks and will be co-taught by 1 ELA teacher who will structure the dramatic performance and 1 ENL teacher who will provide language supports in English and Spanish to approximately 20 student in a team-teaching model. This program will incorporate reading and writing activities with dramatic performance for ninth through eleventh grade. The teachers will incorporate English and Spanish cinema as prompts for writing activities. This will be taught in English with Spanish language supports provided by the ENL teacher. Our other academic afterschool programs will be to provide additional support to ELLs in the following content areas (U.S History, Global Studies, Living Environment, ELA) and will be taught by the appropriate content teacher who will teach content specific vocabulary etc. and 1 ENL teacher who will provide language supports. This program will use a team teaching model with flexible grouping to provide appropriate support at various levels. These programs will run 5 weeks at a time throughout the school year but especially in December and May and will depend upon availability of teachers’ after school from 2:30 to 5pm. Programs will focus on reading and writing in the content area especially essay writing about U.S History and Living Environment topics. Teachers will utilize the content curriculum maps to teach academic and content specific vocabulary using different strategies. Materials: Achieve 3000 or Think Cerca as a supplement to materials used during the regular school day, National Geographic Reading Expeditions for Social Studies and Science to supplement materials used during the regular school day, Student and Chaperone Admission to NY Historical Society, Central Park Zoo Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our ENL teachers attend trainings and workshops sponsored by the NYCDOE’s Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. These trainings provide our teachers with evidence-based information on how to foster ELLs success. Without these professional development opportunities, our teachers would not be able to learn and put into practice the new skills and technologies being developed to ensure ELL progress.This In addition to these trainings, our ENL teachers will meet with content area teachers who provide services to ELLs to engage in professional development including curriculum mapping. All but 4 ELLs in our building receive their ELL support in the Integrated ENL model without any stand alone ENL support other than what they voluntarily attend in Title 3 programs. We have found that our academic content teachers are willing to adopt methods and strategies like the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP) to support the needs of ELLs in their ENL classroom but they need more support themselves to implement these concepts into curriculum and instruction even in the co-teaching classroom. In the ENL classroom content teachers are 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development supported by the expertise that the ENL teacher brings to the partnership but the team teaching model is limited to ELA classes in our school. Our ELLs need support in their other courses as well. This professional development will provide greater access to curriculum that models support for ELLs. Teachers in this program will analyze various ELL data points including student work and the EDAT to design appropriate accommodations for ELLs in the curriculum maps. Our school utilized funding from the ELL College Readiness Grant in 2017-2018 to develop draft curriculum maps and some units with Learner Center Initiative that incorporate content specific supports for ELLs. Title 3 funding will be used to support the continuation of this work in 2018-2019 by adding "learning experiences for ELLs" and strategies to teach academic vocabulary to the units. This professional development team of teachers will ensure that the needs of ELLs will be accommodated and teachers will continue to monitor their progress through inquiry and reflection on student work. The exact training dates are to be announced but will be scheduled after school for 7 weeks for 90 minutes. Attendance sheets and agendas will be maintained by the ENL teacher and AP. A book study using "Making Content Comprehensible for Secondary English Learners : The SIOP Model" will guide these practices with support from the Assistant Principal of Data, Testing and Compliance. The teachers will receive per session funded from Title 3 to support this work. Teachers to receive training: 2 ENL Teachers and 2-4 Content Area Teachers depending upon scheduling. Materials: Book for each teacher relating to curriculum mapping and best practices in supporting ELLs in content area classes. Title: Making Content Comprehensible for Secondary English Learners : The SIOP Model by Echevarria, Vogt and Short; Training provided by Learner Centered Initiative Maintenance of records: Records of teacher attendance to outside PD during the school day will be maintained by the Payroll Secretary; sign in sheets and agendas for in house PD will be kept on file with the AP Data. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PARENT INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER AND COLLEGE TRANSITION AFTER SCHOOL COURSE Rationale: Parental involvement remains a challenge for our community. It is especially difficult for our parents and teachers to communicate with each other due to the language barriers. This course will provide parents with readily available tools to communicate with teachers, and vice-versa, and will minimize the language barrier issues we are currently encountering. In addition, parents will be informed about the college admissions process, financial aid for college and virtual college campus visit. We have observed that very few parents of ELLs attend our school 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities wide events that focus on the college application process because of language barriers. They would prefer an event that is smaller and is predominately conducted in their home language. We would like to create an environment that is more welcoming to these families to ask questions in their home language and get information from our staff and CBO which is easier to do in a smaller event that is catered to their specific needs. Schedule and Duration: The course will run for a total of 10 two-hour weekly sessions after school from 5:00pm through 7:00pm. The days of these sessions will be determined by the participants' availability. Topics to be covered: This class will teach parents computer basics, how to set up an email account, how to communicate through email and Remind and how to use the PupilPath program (which has a translation tool) to communicate with their child’s teachers, college admissions process, financial aid for college and virtual college campus visit. In addition, we will be utilizing funds from 21st century grant to pay for our CBO partner, Sunnyside Community Services to provide information sessions about the college admissions process and financial aid for the parents of ELLs. Name of provider: 1 Career and Technical Education certified teacher who is skilled in using computers, 1 College and Career Counselor and 1 Spanish translator since that is the predominant ELL population. These positions will be posted and filled, as we get closer to the start of the course. Sunnyside Community Services. Parent Notification: Parents of ELL students will receive a letter from the ENL Coordinator, which will be translated into the student’s home language. In addition, our parent coordinator will announce the availability of this course at parent meetings. Parents of title 3 students and ELLs will be invited to attend these classes and workshops through letters, remind app, blackboard connect and phone calls from the Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator. Materials: Curriculum and materials from the National Center for Family Literacy and the Choices Institute at Goddard Community Center Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 2018-19 CEP 52 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Queens Vocational and Technical High Borough Queens School Number 600 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melissa Burg Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Viviana Isaza Teacher/Subject Area Pallavi Kidambi- ENL Teacher/Subject Area D'Astolfo- ELA Related-Service Provider Bethann Kramer Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Lisa Martino Alves Coach School Counselor Lisseth Salas Ocampo/AP- PPS Parent Parent Coordinator Miriam Baez-Medina Field Support Center Staff Member Eric MacDonald Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1489 2018-19 CEP 54 Total number of ELLs 79 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The ENL teachers administer the a diagnostic assessment in the beginning of the school year in the content classes to assess the literacy skills of all ELLs. When the results are available the teachers analyze the students scores to find their strengths and weaknesses. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers meet with ELA content teachers during department meetings each school day to create and analyze assessments with the support of the Assistant Principal of ELA and the Assistant Principal of Data and Testing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Classroom assessments including common assessments across common courses are administered throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 55  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers meet with ELA content teachers during department meetings each school day to create and analyze assessments with the support of the Assistant Principal of ELA and the Assistant Principal of Data and Testing. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In our ENL program, most of our students achieve a commanding score within their first few years at our school. More than half of our ELLs are ninth graders. Of these freshmen, 48 entered our school scoring expanding, while only 10 transitioning and 2 emerging. We currently have 29 Sophmores and Junior ELLs, 27 of which are expanding. We have 12 th grade ELLs.(Need to edit after May 2017 NYSESLAT scores are released). We use their NYSESLAT scores to program student classes so they receive the required number of ENL instructional minutes according to their proficiency levels. We also analyze NYSESLAT results to evaluate our program and gain insights to make improvements. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The Program Chair and Asst. Chair have access to this information to program student classes. In addition, all teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms receive information about who the ELLs are and their English proficiency levels that is provided by the Asst. Principal of Data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Queens Vocational provides a free-standing ENL program for Entering and Emerging Students. Most of our ELLs receive services in an Integrated ENL setting because they scored Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding. These programs align with Common Core ELA Standards to ensure student preparation for the ELA Regents. Teachers use grade level texts and scaffolding and differentiation techniques. Students are placed according to their NYSESLAT scores into either an: Stand alone class (where students receive 180 minutes for Entering or 90 minutes for Emerging per week) and/or an Integrated ENL class (where students meet for 180 or 90 minutes a week for according to their levels). Our Integrated ENL program is co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified English Language Arts teacher in the grade level ELA course. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 56  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? QVTHS has two certified ENL teachers who provide instruction through both free-standing ENL and integrated ENL which allow for students at all proficiency levels to receive their respective mandated hours of service. Prior to scheduling students, the program coordinator runs the RLAT to find all ELLs' NYSESLAT results. Based on these scores students are placed in: Standalone ENL (Entering and Emerging) and/or Integrated ENL (Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL Content Area support is provided through academic content area vocabulary and skills development in all stand alone ENL classes taught by our two certified ENL teachers, Ms. Isaza and Ms. Kidambi. In addition, native language support is provided through use of classroom dictionaries and glossaries. These resources are also distributed on Regents days by the the ENL teachers. All ENL classes utilize a variety of texts to enrich vocabulary, comprehension, and writing skills across levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since QVTHS does not have a transitional bilingual or dual language program, we do not evaluate ELLs in their native language. However ELLs, and former ELLs who became proficient within the last two years, are offered Regents Exams in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: There are very few SIFE students enrolled at Queens Vocational. Our plan for working with SIFE students includes working with the students’ guidance counselors to ensure that appropriate transition strategies are developed and implemented to assist the students in their re-entry to formal schooling. Newcomers: Our plan for working with newcomers includes extended class time, daily vocabulary work, and emphasis on use of prior knowledge and acquisition of new knowledge. In addition, we provide appropriate skill level texts including dictionaries, workbooks, and leveled libraries of classics. These students use Achieve 3000 to learn more about current events and content area subjects. ELLs with 4-6 years: These students also engage in a wide variety of texts including: graphic novels, leveled libraries of classics, grade level non-fiction texts to increase their vocabulary, comprehension, and reading skills. When possible they are placed in a history class that is co-taught with a certified ENL teacher. Long-term ELLs: Our plan for long-term ELL students includes intensive ELA Regents prep with an emphasis on application, analysis, and synthesis, regular monitoring of class and regents grades. ELLs with Special Needs: In response to the requirements of Special Needs students, we review IEPs regularly to ensure that students are programmed appropriately, and receive mandated modifications and support services as well as their mandated ENL classes. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: The progress of students making the transition out of ENL into general education ELA classes is monitored regularly. These students receive 90 minutes or more of Integrated ENL support a week, where they focus primarily on Regents preparation. Former ELLs continue to receive testing modification on Regents Exams 2018-19 CEP 57  for two years after they achieve a proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. In addition, content and ENL classroom teachers differentiate their lessons based on the various needs of the students as they progress through the course. Teachers refer to formative, summative and state assessments to develop these plans. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials the provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language-development. These include using graphic organizers, having a text and visually rich classroom, and project based learning. Teachers develop appropriate and multiple entryways for students to engage in the content considering their language skills and academic or behavioral needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with Special Needs: In response to the requirements of Special Needs students, we review IEPs regularly to ensure that students are programmed appropriately, and receive mandated modifications and support services as well as their mandated ENL classes. ELLs-SWDs in the self contained setting are supported in their ELA classroom by a content teacher, ISS teacher and ENL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers are made aware of which of their students are ELLs based on information found on Skedula and information provided to them by the Assistant Principal of Data and Testing. With this knowledge teacher teams create assignments that strengthen students' vocabulary and writing skills. ELLs are also offered evening classes which enable them to earn course credit if they have fallen behind. Such classes are usually smaller and the teacher can give them more individual attention. Students who may need additional time to meet the Algebra 1 standards are placed into a two year Algebra 1 track to allow for more time to attain mastery. After school and before school tutoring in Global Studies for ELLs is offered throughout the year to support these students unique needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our Spanish language program is expanding in an effort to better support our ELLs whose home language is Spanish. Spanish is the home language of almost all of our ELLs. We will be starting an AP Spanish Language and Culture class in September 2017. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are not any programs that will be discontinued for ELLs. They benefit from the stand alone ENL classes with the Integrated ENL classes. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are able to participate in all school programs including various sports teams, a book club, as well as a Sunnyside Community tutoring and counseling. In addition to these school activities, students are encouraged to join programs that are connected to their vocational training such as the MOUSE Squad (a computer technician team) the robotics team and the animation club which fosters the skills of graphic arts students and others. Our schools' Title III plan outlines before, after and Saturday supplemental services offered to ELLs to support their language acquisition and academic progress. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL classroom have access to a laptop cart so students can use computers to conduct required research both in English and their native language. Each of the classrooms are equipped with a Smart board that allows teachers to easily incorporate visual aids and native language supports. 2018-19 CEP 58  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? One of the ENL teachers at our school is bilingual in Spanish and English, the native language of more than 2/3rds of our ELLs. All of the other students have access to digital and hard bilingual dictionaries or glossaries. The QVTHS library offers a wide range of books in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL and content area teachers are constantly assessing their students academic needs and interests, both formally and informally to ensure that services and resources are age and grade level appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are not a co-located school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All incoming 9th grade QVTHS students are invited to our Annual Orientation which is held before the beginning of the formal school year. In addition, parents of ELLs are provided with information sessions at the Orientation to better understand the options open to their children and the supports with which they will be provided. Students enrolling after the Orientation or later than 9th grade are provided with one on one information sessions with the guidance staff, school tours, and the opportunity to meet with other faculty and school community members such as the Assistant Principal of Data, Testing and Compliance and Assistant Principal for Humanities and the Assistant Principals for the Career and Technical Education areas. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered Spanish Language Arts and Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Culture. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupation/physical therapists,, secretaries, parent coordinators, and other school staff will be provided with training this year during Friday professional workshops and during department meetings which will fulfill the mandated 7.5 hours of ELL training. ENL and Content Area teachers across the school community are offered professional development opportunities throughout the year. In addition, they are provided with information about citywide workshops that they are encouraged to attend as well as state and national conferences. The Assistant Principal of Data, Testing and Compliance is Lisa Martino Alves who is provided with professional 2018-19 CEP 59  development opportunities through CFN as available. Our two ENL teachers participate in professional developments provided by the Division of English Language Learners & Student Support. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. REVISE once FRIDAY DATES are determined- The 9th grade Small Learning Community provides an integrated transition program for incoming students with a dedicated Director, Kevin Gallagher, guidance counselor, Caralyn Vasquez, and faculty of approximately 23 teachers. Ms. Isaza and Ms. Kidambi, our two certified ENL teachers, along with Bethann Kramer, our ISS Coordinator, provide ongoing instructional support to the 9th grade team in common planning time meetings as well as in Inquiry Team meetings that are focused on our most needy students. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development clock hours for all teachers prescribed by Part 80 of CR Part 154, is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. The entire school community receives a portion of these professional development hours during "Professional Learning Fridays" and daily Department Meetings which meet on: TBA. For our English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty (50%) of the required professional 42 development clock hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. In addition to the above mentioned meetings, the ENL teachers attend Professional Development Workshops offered by the NYC Department of Education, the Division of English Language Learners & Student Support. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the school year, parents are given access to their child's pupil path account, where they can check their students grades and email their teachers. Parents are regularly updated on their child's progress through progress reports (which are mailed six times a year.) These reports are sent in the parents' native language. In addition to serving as report of their child's progress, they are also invitations for parents to contact the school, to set up a meeting if desired. All parents of ELLs are invited to meetings regarding the student's English language development. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to all extracurricular sports activities as well as many other extracurricular activities. Parents are provided with regular information regarding resources by the Parent Coordinator and through mailings and phone outreach; however attendance at Parent Association meetings and ELL parent orientations remains sparse. DOE and school based translations services are utilized for all communications. Parents are also invited to our annual CTE Night in the Spring Semester during which time 9th graders choose their upper grade Career and Technical Education majors. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 60  We provide parents with a English Language Proficiency Progress Report that describes the students English language acquisition progress. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melissa Burg, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Queens Vocational and Tech HS School DBN: 24Q600 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melissa Burg Title Principal Lisa Martino Alves Assistant Principal Miriam Baez-Medina Parent Coordinator Viviana Isaza David Abreu ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Pallavi Kidambi Teacher/Subject Area Darlene D'Astolfo Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Ali Drew Zambrotta Lisseth Salas Ocampo/AP-PPS Elaine Lindsey Eric MacDonald Bethann Kramer Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Provider Kevin Gallagher Other Assistant Principal Claudio Garcia Other Assistant Principal Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 2018-19 CEP 63 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Queens Vocational and Technical HS Superintendent: Elaine Linds DBN: 24Q600 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs are assessed based on information provided by parents/guardians on the Home Language Survey and ATS data culled for the purposes of the Language Acquisition Policy Demographics report. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 64  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Documents need to be translated into various languages including: Spanish, Bengali, Arabic and Urdi. Findings were communicated to the school community through faculty conferences, email, SLT meetings, and Small Learning Community meetings. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Written translations are provided by in school staff and the Parent Coordinator. When necessary written translations are also requested, two weeks prior to being needed, through the DOE document Translation Unit. Such documents include Parent Teacher Conference announcements and Progress Reports. Documents such as the Progress Reports, which are sent six times a year, are translated through Skedula, into the language of the parent. Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 65  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Currently two paraprofessionals, two school aides, the Parent Coordinator, AP, Pupil Personnel Services, and one teacher on staff provide translation services for oral communication at Orientations, Open Houses, and parent conferences. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Based on the stipulations put forth in the New York City Department of Education Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities we provide each parent/guardian “whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services” with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities outlining their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. This information is disseminated 2018-19 CEP 66  through the Pupil Personnel Department at the beginning of every year via the Family Guide and copies of the Bill in English and Spanish. Signs indicating the availability of interpretation services are posted at the main entrance and outside the Parent Coordinator’s office in eight languages. The school safety plan includes the number of the translation unit for parents to call for translation services when needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 67 
