2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 25Q670 School Name: ROBERT F. KENNEDY COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ANTHONY D. BARBETTA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert F. Kennedy Community High School 342500011670 9 - 12 75-40 Parsons Blvd., Flushing, NY 11366 School Number (DBN): 25Q670 718-969-5510 Phone Number: 718-969-5524 Fax: Anthony Barbetta abarbet@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Anthony Barbetta Joseph Zingone Charlene Dawson Charlene Dawson Lisa Looby Justin Rossman None District Information Geographical District: 25 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden place Queens NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)866-7396 Phone Number: 718 9695524 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens North Borough Field Support Center Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North 4th floor LIC, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: Ipender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Barbetta Joe Zingone Charlene Dawson N/A Lisa Looby Justin Rossman Jose Sibrian N/A Stephanie Christiano Joshua Cohen *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Member/ UFT UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frank McQuail Sherrell Jordan Carrie Huggins Maria Katehis Noreen Barlow Judith Beaubrun Jordy Pineiro Min Yoon CSA PTA UFT PTA PTA PTA Student Student Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide all students with a high quality, comprehensive, and personalized education by incorporating the use of technology and research-based teaching styles into our academic program. Through our community service program, we aim to involve our students in the community around them and encourage them to become civic-minded people who are eager to support their community. As a small learning community, we hope to create a guidance program that fosters open and honest communication between students, their teachers, and their 2018-19 CEP 9  parents. Creating this communication “triad” helps us, as a school community, provide the best possible education for our students. Our College Head-Start program enables highly motivated students to earn 10-15 college credits a year in the 11th and the 12th grade while fulfilling their High School graduation requirements through our partnerships with SUNY Albany, SUNY Farmingdale, CUNY College Now Program, Vaughn College, as well as College Board Advanced Placement courses. In an effort to minimize the barriers between High School and College, students are supported through our academically challenging curriculum, our free S.A.T. preparation program, our college application and essays writing advisors and our college visits. Students at R.F.K. are also required to complete 50 hours of community service/internship to optimize their chance of getting admitted to the college of their choice. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Robert F. Kennedy Community High School is a high school with 740 students from grades 9 to 12. The school population comprises 12% Black, 38% Hispanic, 14% White, and 36% Asian students. The student body includes 13% English language learners and 19% SWD (students with disabilities). The average attendance rate for the school year 2017 – 2018 was 90%. Robert F. Kennedy Community High School is a small, college preparatory high school offering Honors, Dual Enrollment, Advanced Placement and ICT classes. Our College Head Start Program enables students to earn 10-15 college credits a year in 11 th and 12 th grades. Students are supported through our challenging academic curriculum, Smart board interactive technology, multiple classroom and mobile computer labs, comprehensive student activities and personalized counseling program. RFK provides students with an extensive array of Academic Intervention Services, including but not limited to: Online Instruction, Saturday Academy, Saturday and After School College Advisement, Saturday and After School Regents Preparation. Students of Robert F. Kennedy Community High School are required to complete 50 hours of community service. Our goal is to provide learning activities that require high levels of critical thinking and reasoning, accompanied by the application of learning to real world situations. Additionally, teachers will be focusing on specific skills in each of the content areas that based on achievement data, need improvement. An emphasis on reading, writing and building academic vocabulary will be evident in all subject areas. Our teachers are experienced and dedicated professionals who are committed to helping all students reach their full potential. Our administrative and guidance team continually visit classes and meet with students to talk about high expectations, set goals and support and challenge all students to do what it takes to be successful. Our expectations are that all students should be active learners, be responsible for arriving to school on time, attend all classes every day, seek help from their teachers when needed, follow school rules, be considerate of and respectful to others and take part in school activities. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  The student body includes 13% English language learners and 19% students with disabilities. Many of these students need academic interventions especially in the areas of math and English. These students need more guidance interventions as well as individualized tutoring to help them in their academics. Their reading skills are lower than then their peers. We have a new IEP teacher who will assist with academic intervention services. We will work with some of these students to help strengthen their socialization skills and their social emotional well being. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths: ● School leaders and staff have an ongoing understanding of the performance and progress of all students which strategically informs instructional decisions at the classroom level resulting in improved academic outcomes for all learners. ● Communication about high expectations and the availability of supports to meet expectations result in strong partnerships among administration, teachers and parents to prepare students for college and career. ● School leaders make strategic organizational decisions in order to align resources to the school’s goals, enhance student achievement outcomes, and improve learning for all student groups. ● School leaders strategically utilize a research based framework of teaching to evaluate teacher practice and provide focused professional development, resulting in strong teacher practice that positively affects student learning. Accomplishments: ● Increased students’ Algebra Regents results from 79 to 84%; Global History from 55 to 70% and Algebra II from 50 to 85%. ● Increased scholarship report in most subject areas. ● Increase in the number of students enrolled in college level classes and earning credits.   Four year SWD Graduation Rate 77%, ENL Graduation Rate 75%. Increase in College and Career Ready from 42 to 55%. Areas of Growth: ● Increased student achievement in Global History and Living Environment. ● Increase in the number of Students With Disabilities graduating with a Regents Diploma. Focus for this Year: ● Reinforce the use of multiple entry points and elevate levels of student engagement so that all students demonstrate higher order thinking skills and a focus on writing in all content areas. ● Teachers develop/review unit and lesson plans that are appropriately aligned to the C.C.S.S. ● Strengthen teacher use of ongoing checks for understanding to ensure that critical adjustments in instruction result in elevated levels of student performance. 2018-19 CEP 11  ● Provide additional emotional, social and academic support for all students. ● Further engage parents in their children’s learning and become true partners of the school. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q670 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 756 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 13 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 20 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 72.1% % Reduced Lunch 11.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 34.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 80% 74.6% 13.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 128 122 88.8% 7.7% 16.0% 12.7% 36.1% 2.9% 6 28% 8 N/A N/A 85% 81% 91.1% 38% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A NO N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the course of the past three years, our college and career readiness has remained steady between 42-47%. In order to increase our college readiness, our students will need to score higher on their Math and English Regents Examinations. Our math Regents passing rate is approximately 84%; however our college ready rate is closer to 65%. Our English Regents passing rate in near 90%, but our college ready rate is closer to 75%. Our SWD student population falls behind these rates by 15%. We have improved our college ready, but we are still in need of improvement. We have a four year graduation rate of 81%, with SWD students graduating at 77% and ENL students graduating at 75% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the percentage of students scoring higher on the English and Math Regents and/or SAT Exam. This will result in a higher percentage of students meeting college and career readiness. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ●  Conduct an item analysis of baseline and benchmark assessments to diagnose areas of weakness and strength. (11th graders will take the NYS ELA Regents)   Teachers will re-evaluate their lessons to ensure that activities are common core aligned.  ●  Implement use of shared criteria for assessment of student mastery (Common Uniform Midyear and Final exam, common rubrics, portfolio review, etc.  Parents will be informed on the requirements and expectations of their children through PTA meeting, parent coordinator and school newsletters.  Teachers will conduct reach out during the Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement. ● Through on-going Professional Development, teachers will focus on Differentiated Instruction for SWD/ELL’s. Teachers will also share best practices within and outside their departments. There will be tutoring available for students during the week and on Saturdays. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire student population Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal -Content Area Teachers -Lead teachers Entire student population Sept 2018-June 2019 Content Teachers/ Assistant Principals Entire student population Sept 2018-June 2019 Content Teachers/Assistant Principal  Interdisciplinary emphasis on close reading and writing. Entire school population Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Assistant Principals 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold monthly PTA meetings that will inform parents of our goal. We will included any necessary materials on our website. We send out a monthly newsletter to the community. We will utilize our curriculum night in September and our Parent Teacher Conferences. My administrative staff, teachers and Parent Coordinator will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common planning during P.D. time. ● Materials and templates, including suggested lesson plans, Unit plans, curriculum map and pacing calendar template. ● Exemplary curricula (Engage N.Y. , AMAPS, NYC DOE Common Core Library, NYC Scope and Sequence materials) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will be conducting uniform assessments throughout the year to measure progress. There will be uniform exam in November and April. In February, there will be uniform mid year exams and in June there will be uniform final exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) There will be a series of uniform exams and assessments to assess progress. There will also be the January ELA Regents to help us measure success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the 2017 Learning Environment Survey it indicated that the students’ social emotional needs are not being sufficiently met. Social emotional learning Score Press toward academic achievement 55 Personal attention support 57 Peer support for academic work 63 Our staff has excellent relationships with our students. They need to aware of the students needs in order to better address them. There has been significant improvement in these areas. Just four years ago these numbers were in the forties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to meet the social, emotional and academic needs of all students, the School Learning Environment Survey will show an increase of students’ satisfaction with the school support to reach 65 and above. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Our Guidance Counselors will be fully engaged and participants in our inquiry teams. Students/ teachers/parents Sept 2018-June 2019  We are increasing the role of our School Mental Health Consultant. She will conduct more workshops with our faculty, students and parents.  We have increased the number of electives for our students. Key personnel, Teachers/Guidance counselors, office staff, Assistant Principals and Principal  Peer-tutoring program will provide students with additional academic support for students in the 9th and 10th grade. Students at risk in the 9 th and 10 th grades Sept 2018-June 2019 Senior students, COSA, NHS coordinators  Our Guidance staff and social worker will meet regularly with with those students with the greatest needs. Entire student body Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselors/  There will be more promotion of clubs, teams and after school activities to engage all students in our community. Our school has a special focus during Respect for all week Entire student population by interest. COSA, NHS coordinators COSA, Club/ Team advisors, Coaches/Teachers /Guidance counselors Sept 2018- June 2019 Ongoing with periodic scheduled events throughout the year (e.g. games, assemblies, shows… 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have on-going conversations with parents regarding their child’s challenges. We will utilize our Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time to meet with parents. We will have specific teachers and guidance staff working with these students. There will be workshops for parents related to this area. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff needed for adopting students, student leaders, funding for trips, fees, refreshment expenses. We will partner with our mental health team to conduct the workshops for students and parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review feedback and informal surveys from our students and teachers on the progress of our programs. By February, 2019 an in house survey mirroring the School Learning Survey (social emotional section) will be given to all students to gauge responses and address issues. In February, we will review our OORS data to look for patterns in our student incidents as it relates to social emotional needs. There will also be several student and faculty focus groups to monitor progress towards meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress, teacher reports, scholarship reports and student surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Over the course of the past few years, our teacher teams and grade meeting teams have had a focus on student achievement. Many of our teachers believe that our school's guidance counselors and administrators should play a larger and more significant role on these teams. Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Administrators will lead teams and Professional Development. Guidance Counselors will increase the number of individual meetings with students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers, Guidance Counselors and administrators will participate on an inquiry team and grade level team. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher and Guidance Counselors will provide effective professional development based on the findings of the Inquiry Teams. There will be additional emphasis on working with students with disabilities, ENL students and struggling students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Target Faculty Sept 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers and Guidance Counselors. The teams will analyze data such as assessments, progress reports and report cards to make decisions on PD and student needs. Target Faculty Sept 2018 – June 2019 Lead personnel, Principal, Assistant Principal,  Professional development opportunities agreed upon by pedagogical and supervisory staff and focusing on the strengthening of instructional practices will be offered during the Monday Professional Development time and DOE Professional Development days. Teachers receiving outside Professional Development will turn key the materials and knowledge to their colleagues. Target Faculty Sept 2018 – June 2019 Lead personnel, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parents will be updated through regular PTA meetings, the parent teacher conferences, Tuesday family engagement time, and through our on-line terminal, Skedula. Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize our Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time. Our school holds four parent teacher conferences during the school year. This gives an opportunity for collaboration. There is an open door policy for our parents to meet with administration and our parent coordinator. Our Assistant Principals and myself are available and responsible to ensure there is someone to accommodate any parent or guardian. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development at the school and the district level will be a necessity. The school will be benefiting from the talent coach visits, inter-visitations within and outside the school to observe best practices at other locations. Professional development from outside sources will also be available. Monday's provide time for our teams to work together collaboratively. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In November, February, and April, we will review data such as minutes, agendas and student data to ensure all Guidance Counselors, teacher and administrators are participating on our teams. We will measure student progress, successful parent outreach, and professional development opportunities based on the inquiry work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment data, progress report data and report card data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The June 2018 cohort of students showed a graduation rate of close to 80%%. This is a decrease from the previous years where the graduation rate fell between 82% and 86%. Our strengths for this graduating class are as follows: a higher college and career ready rate of over 50% up from 42%.; many of our Regents scores are also up, especially in US History, Global History , Algebra and Algebra 2.; our SWD graduation rate is up to 77% and our ENL graduation rate is up to 75%. Our entire school community is committed to the success of our students and go well beyond their requirements to meet their needs. We have a budget that will support the extra services that our students will need to successfully complete their graduation requirements. We will focus of credit accumulation, state Regents examination and guidance support for all of our students. Parents will be involved in the process as well. There will be consistent messages and notifications to parents about their child's progress and responsibilities for their classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our graduation rate will increase from 80 to 83%. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Teacher teams will collaborate to common plan and share best practices on differentiated instruction for SWD’s and ELL’s. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 ● We will Identify students who are failing classes on a monthly basis and collaborate with Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, and parents to create an action plan for each student. Provide student with a variety of Academic Intervention Services based on students’ needs. ● We will review marking period scholarship reports and analyze assessment data to identify students’ weaknesses. Adjust planning and instruction and diversify assessment tools to measure students’ achievement. Provide parents with workshops on using Pupil Path a means to monitor their child’s progress in each class on an ongoing basis. We will utilize the Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement time to inform parents on their child's progress and help them with strategies to help improve their child's academic performance. All students Sept 2018- June 2019 All students Sept 2018- June 2019 All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Team teachers, Guidance counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, Team teachers, Guidance counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, Team teachers, Guidance counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, Team teachers, Guidance counselors  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On a monthly basis, we will review the struggling students’ progress reports, report cards, teacher quantitative data end term and end year reports. Parents will have four opportunities to visit our school during Parent Teacher Conferences. We have Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement and meetings. Parents also have access to our on-line grading system where they monitor their child's progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  ● Professional development for I.C.T. teachers, parents’ involvement, guidance intervention. ● Per session funds to provide after school and Saturday tutoring.  Per session funds for the Guidance Counselor to meet with students and parents to review graduation status. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On a monthly basis, we will review the struggling students progress reports, report card,s teacher quantitative data end term and end year reports. We will conduct a mid year check up for students. This will lead to parental conferences with students in need of AIS services. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress reports  Student report cards   Uniform assessments Teacher feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Pursuant to the results of our parent survey, parental involvement was identified as an area where the school did not meet the target (score of 47/100). While over 90% of parents who participated in the survey are very satisfied with the school and the education their children received here at R.F.K., parent engagement and involvement is an area in which the school can improve. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019; ● Parental participation in school-provided family related information sessions will increase by 3% as indicated by the Monthly PTA attendance sheet. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage parents in workshops centered on standards, Growth Mindset, Pupil Path, High School graduation, College and Career Readiness and strategies to help their child at home. Entire parent population Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Monitor that all the information is communicated to families in their preferred home languages. Entire parent population Sept. 2018-June-2019 Utilize the Parent Teacher Conferences to engage families. There will be student centered events that will entice families to attend these conferences and meetings. Hold workshops for families of ELL’s SWD’s and other high need students centered on graduation requirements and post-secondary planning. Provide opportunities for parents to meet with administrative, pedagogical and counseling staff whenever they come to school. Encourage parents/guardians to attend school conferences and events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept. 2018 – June- 2019 Parents of SWD’s, ELL’s and all high-need students Entire parent population Sept. 2018 – June - 2019 Principal/Guidance counselor, Parent coordinator, outside speakers. Principal/Guidance counselor, Parent coordinator, outside speakers. Assistant Principal Special Ed., Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, I.E.P. teachers. Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance counselor, Parent Coordinator, office staff. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Parent Coordinator, teachers, Assistant Principal , Guidance Counselors, P.T.A. President and the executive board, collaboration with outside organizations, workshop materials, refreshments, will provide incentives to attend. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By November, we will review parents’ attendance during PTA monthly meetings as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. ● By November, review the number of parents who visit school on a daily basis and compare it to the 2017-2018 school year.  In February, we will conduct a mid-year check to see if we are making our goal by comparing it to the 2017-2018 school year. ● In October, December, February and April, review teacher outreach to parents. We will compare it to the 2017-2018 school year to see if we are making progress with our goal. ● Review Parent Coordinator's monthly log of outreach and parent conferences and compare it to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will track parents visits to school, monitor attendance during PTA meetings and school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) *Freshmen who are below grade level. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) *Modeling “Think Aloud” Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) *Small Groups *Before/After School *Current and former ENL students. *Annotated Reading *Saturday Tutoring *Saturday Academy *One-On-One *During School Day *Studentsat riskof failing the course and/or theRegents Exam. *Differentiated Assignments *Levered Reading *Differentiated Instruction in classroom *Saturday Regents Tutoring *Whole Class Instruction *Peer editing *Peer Tutoring by ARISTA students *Wed/Thurs Tutoring Mathematics *Freshmen below grade level. *Seniors who have not met graduation requirements. *Studentsat riskof failing the course and/or theRegents Exam. *Freshmen below grade level are programmed for a four semester Algebra 1 class designed to build conceptual understanding and help students meet CCLS Math Standards. *Seniors who have not met graduation requirements are *Small Groups *Before/After School *One-On-One *During School Day *Saturday Tutoring *Saturday Academy *Differentiated Instruction in classroom *Whole Class Instruction *Pull-Out 2018-19 CEP 29  Science *Current and former ENL students. *Studentsat riskof failing the course and/or theRegents Exam. Social Studies *Current and former ENL students. programmed for remediation class *C-6 Tutoring *Teacher tutoring *Peer Tutoring *A Saturday tutorial is offered for students to prepare them for the Regents Exams and help them meet college readiness standards. *Offering Math course through College Now for Seniors who have met CUNY College readiness standards. *Teacher tutoring *One-On-One *During School Day *Make-up Labs *Saturday Tutoring *Saturdays *Peer Tutoring * ESL students receive support in Science by having ESL Teacher co-teach with GE Science Teacher *Tutoring *Differentiated Instruction in classroom *Whole Class Instruction *Small Groups *After School, Wed/Thurs *Peer Tutoring *One-On-One *Studentsat riskof failing the course and/or theRegents Exam. *ESL students receive support in Social Studies by having ESL teacher co-teach with GE Social studies teacher. *Saturday Tutoring *During School Day *Saturday Academy *Differentiated Instruction in classroom *Whole Class Instruction 2018-19 CEP 30  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker and outside service providers. *Testing, assessment and placement of students is done by the School Psychologist/The one full time Speech Pathologist that provides services both on a one-to-one basis and in small group settings during the school day Individual Counseling *During the school day *Small Group Counseling *Summer Peer Leadership Program *Group Counseling *Mediation/Conflict Resolution Training *Advocacy/referrals for students. *An itinerant hearing teacher who provides one-to-one services on a part time basis *Itinerant Occupational Therapist provides one-to-one service on a part time basis. * Our Physical Therapist is also on an itinerant basis who works with the students on a one-to-one basis. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 9 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing are provided with all necessary school supplies , transportation and other living supplies when the school deem necessary or upon the request of the student/parents Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  Our school reaches out to these students. We find out what they need. As per Title 1 regulations, we set aside $100 per student. We purchase emergency supplies and clothing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. This funding comes from our Title 1 funding. 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our strategies to attract Highly Qualified Teachers are multi-faceted. During our screening and interview process for new teachers, our levels of expectation become imminently clear. Our questioning of teachers during the interview process cuts to the core of their knowledge of being Highly Qualified. Our typical battery of questions includes lesson development, questioning techniques, their use of reading and writing techniques for classroom tasks, how they implement and use homework assignments, their knowledge of data and its usage for group instruction and differentiation, their comfort level with behavioral techniques and strategies, technological capabilities and experience and the level of parent involvement they seek. Before being hired, a demo lesson is often utilized. While teaching, they are directed to maintain daily detailed lesson plans for instruction and rubrics for assessment. We offer intensive mentoring and support to our new teachers, including meeting with the Principal on a bi-weekly basis. There is also ample professional development opportunities both inside and outside of school. Our school has an array of extra-curricular activities in which we encourage our new teachers to participate in. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development time has been generated in faculty meetings, department meetings and SBO days to further develop-an understanding of the CCSS. Curricula will continued to be modified to increase the amount of writing in each of our classrooms across content areas. Also, daily PD by in house literacy coach with a daily, weekly, monthly professional learning calendar. Focus on Falling in Love with Close Reading. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 34  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers working in teams develop common assessments for each course. When working in teams, they regularly share best practices and assessments. There is a professional development committee that helps produce the topics that will be covered in the weekly professional development sessions. Professional development is also available for individual teachers who request specific topics that they would like to learn about. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X 0 Column B Section Reference(s) X 0 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal $347,136 0 2018-19 CEP 35  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local $12,366 0 $4,867,961 X 0 X X 0 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 36  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Robert F. Kennedy High school Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Robert F. Kennedy High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Robert F. Kennedy High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th. of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Robert F. Kennedy High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 41  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III program will enhance the current ENL program by providing supplemental instruction targeted specifically at the language acquisition and reading comprehension skills necessary to become proficient in the content areas and gain English language proficiency. Regents data and course scholarship reports indicate that there is a need for specific targeted instruction for ELLs in ELA, Living Environment, Earth Science, Global Studies, U.S. History and Participation In Government (See LAP.) As a result of participating in the program ELL students will become more proficient at using higher thinking skills and other skills needed to be successful in state exams and promote credit accumulation hence improving the graduation rate for all ELLs. English is the language of instruction for all after school ELL activities. Students will be engaged in small group instruction and mainly focus on their writing and reading skills as this is indicated as their needs/weaknesses based on the NYSESLAT results. Supplemental instruction sessions for all ELLs will be held after school on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 2:10 to 3:10 pm. In addition, all ELLs will be invited to attend ten Saturday Enrichment Program sessions from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m, depending on our budget. This small group instruction will begin the week of October 15, 2018 and run through January. It will begin again the first week in March, 2018 and run through June. Classes will be taught by a licensed ENL, licensed ELA, Living Environment and licensed Social Studies and Math teachers (Integrated teaching). Instruction will be provided in flexible/small groupings. The language of instruction will be English. Materials used in supplemental instruction are distinct from those used for daily instruction, including teacher created graphic organizers, academic language activities, visual aides and translations. Students will engage in language acquisition and writing activities. Emerging/Entering students will also utilize Rosetta Stone and Castle Learning to help them build their academic proficiency skills. ENL instruction will be provided to all ELLs, with a focus on all Entering, Emerging and Transitional struggling ELLs on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 2:10 p.m. to 3:10 pm by a licensed ENL teacher or an ENL and a content area teacher. The ENL teachers will provide home language support for Spanish and Mandarin speaking students. Rosetta Stone will be purchased as an online tool to help Entering and Emerging students improve their proficiency skills. We also offer an after school Asian culture club for all ELLs that will be held on Fridays from 2:10 p.m. to 3:10 pm. This club will be facilitated by a licensed ENL/Mandarin teacher. The objectives of the club will be to immerse Chinese/Mandarin speaking students in the English language through the use of media, dance and popular culture. Parents and students will be notified of this program via mailings in their preferred languages. Students will sign attendance sheets weekly. Records of student attendance will be maintained by the assistant principal. *Once again, this year, we will also use extra funding if we win an art grant we applied for: "NYCDOE: Arts for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities." We 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will begin working with an Arts organization (The Arts Horizons Program) to offer visual arts in two classes of ELLs/SWDs, and dance and music in one ENL/SWD class. There will be two resident artists we will be working with. This program will support literacy development and socio-emotional growth of our ELLs/SWDs. Students will be engaged in workshops that stimulate creativity, vocabulary development, speaking and communication skills. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our staff development will focus on assessing the needs of our ELL students and implementing the Common Core Standards in all content areas. We will provide ongoing common planning and professional development with the content area teachers in the Title III program to address and support the special needs of ELL students in the content area classroom. Teachers will also receive pd on ENL strategies to use in their classroom. PD is scheduled for one Monday afternoon every month from 2:05 pm to 3:25 pm. A tentative schedule of the Fall Semester PD topics is as follows: September 5, 2018 Using TI-Nspire CX Calculators and Navigators in the ELL math classroom September 17, 2018 Using Baseline assessments and the NYSESLAT to revise curricula September 24, 2018 Co-Teaching for ENL and Content area ELA teachers October 1, 2018 Arts Horizons PD October 15, 2018 Begin Inquiry Work October 22, 2018 Using Assessments strategies October 29, 2018 Providing Meaningful and Timely Feedback November 5, 19, 26, 2018 Inquiry Work December 1, 16, 22, 2018 Designing Interim/Midterm Assessments Additionally, one Monday per month, from 2:05 p.m. to 3:35 p.m., teacher teams will use protocols to collaboratively engage in grade level inquiry work. They will study patterns and trends by looking at student work and determine implications for instruction. Certified ENL teachers will attend professional learning offered by the Queens North division and NY RBERN during the school day. Copies of agendas and attendance at all after school and Chancellor's Conference Days will be maintained by the assistant principal. We will examine regents results, student scholarship reports, including NYSESLAT reports to determine the successful implementation of PD strategies. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Based on informal surveys held by our LAC and our Parent NYC Surveys, parents and other family members want/need to be involved and have "a voice" in all aspects of planning, delivering, and evaluating educational services at RFK. All parents of current and transitional ELLs will be invited to Parent Teacher Association Meetings which are held monthly for one hour on Thursdays from 6:00 p.m. to 7:30 pm. Each PTA meeting features a mini-workshop/specific hands on activities for parents depending on the topic/agenda. Parent workshops/meetings will allow us to strengthen family relationships and help us improve student attendance, graduation results and credit accumulation. in Parents of Title III students and parents of ELLs will be invited to these meetings via monthly mailings, School Messenger and the school website. Mailings include translated versions of the Principal's monthly letter to parents in their preferred language. Our Parent Coordinator/LAC, Ms. Angela Miraglia, will continue to work with a School Mental Health Consultant from the DOE Office of School Health to offer Socio-Emotional workshops for all parents/guardians. Among topics for discussion for the school year are: Financial Aid and Graduation Requirements Ending the Silence Workshop Helping Your Child Series Communicating with your Teen Dating, Violence, Prevention and Healthy Relationships Using Pupil Path to Support your Child Academically Parents of Title III students and ELLs will have the opportunity to ask questions and engage in one on one conversation with the workshop facilitators. Workshops are facilitated by guidance counselors, teachers, assistant principals and the principal. We make an effort to meet the needs of our ELL parents at all school events, including New Student Orientation, Open House, Financial Aid Night ( facilitated by SUNY outside provider), Annual Multicultural Event, Arts Horizons Art Exhibit, Senior Awards, Non Senior Awards and and College Night. Parent-Teacher Conferences are well attended, and we will provide interpreters both in the fall and spring. We also have staff available to translate for Chinese and Spanish speaking parents at other events. All mailings will be sent home with translations. Invitations, agendas and attendance records will be maintained by the assistant principal. 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Robert F. Kennedy Community High School Borough Queens School Number 670 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Barbetta Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Evengelina Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area James Gildea/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Christina Apeler/ISS Math Related-Service Provider Jessica Lang Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Susan Adams Coach n/a School Counselor Michelle Arevalo Parent Alex Fulgencio Parent Coordinator Angela Miraglia Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 767 Total number of ELLs 97 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We review 8th grade ELA scores if provided, to determine incoming ELA literacy skills. This data reveals that most of our ELLs are coming in at level 1 and very few at a level 2. There are no level 3/4 students. We use this information and the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT data when creating students’ ninth grade programs and instructional planning. We also administer our own teacher-created baseline assessments and/or baseline assessments developed by the Milestones Series (Heinle) and Understanding Language: Persuasion Across Time and Space by WestEd (Aida Walqui). The ELL Performance Assessment in October is also used to assess ELLs' literacy skills. In addition, we administer lexile tests to determine ELLs' reading levels. Other on-going assessments, reviews, and observations in a classroom take place to improve instructional methods and student feedback throughout the teaching and learning process. The results of formative assessments are used to modify and validate instruction. We use all this information to differentiate instruction in the English and ENL classrooms and set writing 2018-19 CEP 50  skill goals for each grade level in order for students to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers work in inquiry groups with content area teachers to study patterns and trends using these baseline assessment results in alignment with the English Regents Exams and the NYSESLAT. Teacher goals, in other words, dictate teacher and student goals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? See above. Guidance Counselors review 7th grade data in early spring and then the 8th grade data in the summer in order to program ELLs. Data includes lexile levels, ELA scores and NYSESLAT/NYSITELL proficiency levels. Teachers confirm proper placement by administering their own baseline assessments (teacher-created), otherwise program changes are made with AP approval and upon consultation with guidance counselors. Throughout the year, teachers enter anecdotal logs and data based on formative assessments in Pupil Path/Skedula (Datacation System) to track and monitor student performance. *Copies of baseline assessments are collected and approved by Assistant Principals in the beginning of the school year. These assessments are used throughout the year during the inquiry cycle. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review and monitor a number of factors to determine the success of the instructional program for ELLs, including: 9th grade ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING CM Total 0 3 7 25 9 44 10th grade ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING CM Total 0 0 3 15 9 27 11th grade ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING CM Total 1 0 2018-19 CEP 51  5 28 10 44 12th grade ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING CM Total 0 0 3 9 2 14 Total # of Students receiving ELL services =129 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We offer after-school (Title III) and Saturday School for all ELLs and use scholarship reports, progress reports, report cards, midterms, finals to identify struggling students per content area. We also meet in Grade-Level teams (with all teachers) a few times a year to discuss patterns, trends and interventions for ELLs. Tuesday afternoon Parent-Engagement meetings take place throughout the year as well as IEP meetings are held for SWD/ENL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data based on the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA Assessments, ELL Performance Assessments and Regents are used to evaluate and inform our instruction. These reveal that: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use STARS, Datacation (Skedula/Pupil Path), DOE email and Google applications to share data, reports and to communicate with all staff. We also hold meetings throughout the year that include the Program Chair, APs, staff, parents and the guidance counselors. Advance is used to track teacher progress based on formal and informal observations. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 52  Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL: • Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. • Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. Our ENL instructional program consists is an unblocked program in which students are grouped by grade in integrated content classes and heterogeniously in the ENL class. Often students are grouped based on the same language for certain activities so that they can assist each other and respond in their home language. Integrated ENL: Integrated Living Environment ENL: For Co-taught by the Science teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 9th grade ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Integrated Earth Science ENL: Co-taught by the Science teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 10th grade ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Integrated Global History ENL 9: Co-taught by the Social Studies teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 9th grade ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Integrated Global History ENL 10: Co-taught by the Social Studies teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 10th grade ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Integrated US History ENL 11: Co taught by the Social Studies teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 11 th grade ELLs. Integrated Participation in Government ENL 12: Co-tuaght by the Social Studies teacher and the ENL teacher and comprised of 12 th grade ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Stand Alone ENL: Ungraded stand-alone ENL class of ELLs of mixed proficiency levels. Students are programmed according to the following requirements as per CR Part 154: CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language*, Grades 9 to 12 Levels (as of 2015-16 SY) Beginner / Entering = 540 total minutes ENL 180 minutes Stand-Alone ENL 180 integrated ENL/ELA Low Intermediate / Emerging= 360 total minutes ENL 90 minutes Stand-Alone ENL 180 integrated ENL/ELA Intermediate / Transitioning = 180 total minutes ENL 0 minutes Stand-Alone ENL 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Advanced / Expanding = 180 total minutes ENL 0 minutes Stand-Alone ENL 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Proficient / Commanding= 90 total minutes ENL 0 minutes Stand-Alone ENL 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 53  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? See IV 1a. The Entering ENL program consists of three classes: one Integrated ENL social studies class (215 minutes), one Integrated ENL science class (215 minutes) and one Stand-Alone ENL class (215 minutes). Total minutes of ENL= 645 The 9 th and 10 th Grade Emerging and Transitioning ENL programs consists of two classes: either Integrated ENL social studies (215 minutes) or Integrated ENL science (215 minutes) and Stand-Alone ENL (215 minutes). Emerging students in 9 th and 10 th grades are usually programmed for all three. Total minutes ENL=430 or 645 The 11 th and 12 th Grade Emerging and Transitioning ENL programs consist of Integrated UH History (215 minutes) or Integrated Participation in Government (215 minutes) and Stand-Alone ENL (215 minutes). Total minutes ENL: 430 The Expanding ENL program and The Commanding program consist of one Integrated Content Class (215 minutes). Total ENL minutes=215 All ELLs are programmed for five periods of ELA per week for a total of 215 minutes of instruction. Spanish speaking Emerging/Transitioning and Commanding level ELLs are programmed for five periods of Spanish per week. Mandarin speaking Emerging/Transitioning and Commanding level ELLs are programmed for five periods of Mandarin per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELA 9, ELA 10, Living Environment, Earth Science, Global History 9, Global History 10, US History and Participation in Government are co-taught by a content area teacher and an ENL teacher. All other content area classes are taught by a licensed content area teacher. • By programming ELLs for co-taught content area classes they have greater opportunities to accumulate credits and meet graduation requirements more quickly. • All content area classes are taught in English; students have access to electronic translators, translated materials and glossaries. • Teachers use CCLS aligned instruction that incorporates appropriate scaffolding to support students in their understanding of complex texts • Teachers provide students with instruction that develops the disciplinary vocabulary that enhances conceptual understanding in the content areas • Teachers use students’ cultural experiences and prior knowledge to bridge learning and make content meaningful • Teachers infuse instruction with opportunities for students to engage in academic discussions and express themselves in writing • Some of the practices teachers use are: o Close, interactive read aloud o Collaborative discussion and debate o Use of videos, visuals and graphic organizers o Intensive vocabulary instruction o Oral presentations o High level questioning o WITsi: Scaffolded and modeled academic writing o Flipped Classroom o Study Skills o Senior thesis o Integrating ELLs into all Content Areas by Developing Discourse and Discussion 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We administer the Spanish LAB if applicable Teachers administer various formal and informal assessments in Spanish and Mandarin/Chinese 2018-19 CEP 54  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for ELL subgroups as noted below. Many of these strategies overlap in some degree for different subgroups since differentiation is highly individualized. SIFE -We follow the the SIFE Identification Process: NYSED Oral Interview, NYSED SIFE Screener, and Writing Screener if applicable • recognition of the student’s culture and prior experience • translated classroom libraries • translated lower level texts and handouts, including translations of informational texts • tasks that focus on socialization, classroom procedures and routines • regular use of visuals • modeling of spoken English • opportunities to interact with proficient English speakers • note taking, homework and study skills • technology instruction • common native language grouping Newcomers • all of the above, plus • development of academic vocabulary • adapted levels of text complexity • adapted tasks and assessments for different proficiency levels • activities that foster students’ oral language development • modified assignments based on proficiency levels • use of graphic organizers • activities that bridge past experiences with new learning ELLs Receiving Service 4-6 Years • all of the above, plus • continued development of academic vocabulary • continued native language support • activities that further foster students’ oral language development • concentration on the modality in which the student is most deficient • NYSESLAT review and practice with similar materials Long Term ELLs • all of the above (4-6 year ELLs) • intensive instruction in the deficient modalities Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status • continued emphasis on oral language development and academic vocabulary • activities that foster students’ oral language development • use of graphic organizers continued provision of testing accommodations for ELLs up to two years exiting ELL status provision of a minimum of 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction • continued native language support 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 55  Teachers use CCLS aligned instruction that uses appropriate scaffolding to support students in their understanding of complex texts • Teachers provide students with instruction that develops the disciplinary vocabulary that enhances conceptual understanding in the content areas • Teachers use students’ cultural experiences and prior knowledge to bridge learning and make content meaningful • Teachers infuse instruction with opportunities for students to engage in academic discussions and express themselves in writing • Some of the practices teachers use are (Also See IV 3 above): o Close, interactive read aloud o Collaborative discussion and debate o Use of videos, visuals and graphic organizers o Intensive vocabulary instruction o Oral presentations o High level questioning o WITsi /Hochman Method: Scaffolded and modeled academic writing Some of the materials/resources teachers use are 9th/10th grade ELA/ENL: Understanding Language: Persuasion Across Time and Space by WestEd (aida Walqui), The Power Of Media (Common Core Library NYC), Educating Powerful Writers: an Integrated Scope and Sequence 9-12 (NYC) Speak (L. Halse Anderson), The Diary Of A Part time Indian (Alexie), Romiette and Julio (Draper), The Crucible (Miller), English workbook Common core Edition (Topical Review Book), Girl Interrupted (Kaysen), Lovely Bones (Sebolt), One Flew Over The Cuckoo’s Nest (Kesey), College and Career Readiness materialsStand Alone ENL: Milestones Series (Heinle)ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Algebra I & II: eMath Instruction.com-Common core I & II (Parcc) Geometry: Common Core Library/EngageNY Units ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Global: World History Patterns of Interaction (McDougal Littell), U.S. History: The Americans (McDougal Littell)& original historical documents. ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Classroom exams/assessments are translated in Chinese and in Spanish. Living Environment: Biology (Miller and Levine), Earth Science: Heath Earth Science (Holt), Physical Setting Regents Review Practice Tests Based on NYS Core Guide (Topical Review) ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL/SWDs receive all services and instructional mandates indicated on their IEPs while still receiving the required number of minutes of ENL instruction. ELL/SWDs are programmed for integrated co-teaching classes. Some students are programmed for Resource Room (SETSS) or ICT classes, according to their IEPs. ELL/SWDs receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. Speech and language therapy and Counseling are also provided accordingly. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 56  SIFE students and newcomers are provided with AIS services (Title III) from 2:05 to 3:20, two days a week, provided by the content area teacher and instruction on Saturdays from 9 am to 12 pm, during which the ENL teacher works on developing oral language and pre-reading skills. • ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years are provided with AIS services (Title III) from 2:05 to 3:20, two days a week, provided by the content area teacher and Saturday instruction in English, Social Studies and Science. These students are also provided with Saturday Regents preparation courses and online blended learning courses. The ELA Regents preparation course is taught by the ENL teacher. • ELLs receiving services for 6 or more years are provided with AIS services (Title III) from 2:05 to 3:20, two days a week, provided by the content area teacher, Saturday instruction in all subject areas, intensive Regents preparation on Saturdays and after–school, and online blended learning courses to advance credit accumulation. The ELA Regents preparation course is taught by the ENL teacher. • Former ELLs are provided with Saturday instruction in all content areas, Regents preparation on Saturdays and after school (Title III) taught by the content area teachers, Saturday SAT preparation courses taught by content area teachers and online blended learning courses. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We applied for an arts grant: "NYCDOE: Arts for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities." Upon approval of the grant, we will begin working with an Arts organization (The Arts Horizons Program) to offer visual arts in bookmaking and storytelling to two classes of ELLs/SWDs. This program will support literacy development and socio-emotional growth of our ELLs/SWDs. Students will be engaged in workshops that stimulate creativity, vocabulary development, speaking and communication skills. Arts residencies will collaborate with our art teachers and our ENL/SWD teachers to develop Blueprint and ELA/ENL aligned resources that will be used during and beyond the grant-funded period. We will also offer Rosetta Stone (English) to our Entering and Emerging ELLs including Rosetta Stone (Spanish and Mandarin) to our SIFE students/beginner Spanish/Mandarin students. We will continue to offer a Title III program and hopefully expand it based on our budget, that provides all ELLs in all grades with supplemental instruction through an after school program for ENL/ELA, Global Studies and Living Environment. We will also continue to offer a Saturday Enrichment Program (9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m.) across all subjects and all ELLs will be strongly encouraged to attend. Teachers will continue to meet with more struggling ELLs on Tuesdays, period 9. We will also offer a College Head start Program to 11th and 12th graders through our partnerships with four colleges/universities after school. ELLs take Advanced Placement and Elective courses throughout the school day. ELLs will continue to participate in various clubs and in sports/PSAL teams/activities after school throughout the year. We will hold many trips and events throughout the year: Orientation Parent Meetings, College Fairs, Feastivus, a Multicultural Festival etc. ELLs and their parents/guardians are invited to attend. Content area teachers will co-taught ENL classes for 9th and 10th grade Global Studies, Living Environment and Earth Science. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have a choice and equal access to and encouraged to participate in all school programs, including: o Access to electives and native language instruction o Community Service Program o AP Exams o Honors Classes o PSAT Preparation Course o Saturday Enrichment Program o After-School tutoring is designed to offer students help in all content areas. Teachers across all content areas identify students who need tutoring and encourage them to attend. o Student Government and SGO Activities o PSAL Athletics 2018-19 CEP 57  o College Advisement After School and Saturdays o Multicultural Festival, College Fairs, Feastivus ELLs are invited to participate through PA announcements, fliers, and emails sent through Skedula/Pupil Path. ELLs are members of teams, clubs, NHS, Student Government Organization. They participate in school dances, community service activities, school trips, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. o Smartboards in every classroom o Media room with 20 computers and printer access during free periods and after school o Six mobile laptop carts for content classes o Fully automated library and access to databases in the native language o Discovery Education Software for teacher use o Edmentum blended learning o APEX online learning o Scholastic magazines o Translations, glossaries and translators o Flipped Classroom, various technology apps and use of iPads Some of the materials/resources teachers use are - 9th/10th grade ELA/ENL: Understanding Language: Persuasion Across Time and Space by WestEd (aida Walqui), The Power Of Media (Common Core Library NYC), Educating Powerful Writers: an Integrated Scope and Sequence 9-12 (NYC) Speak (L. Halse Anderson), The Diary Of A Part time Indian (Alexie), Romiette and Julio (Draper), The Crucible (Miller), English workbook Common core Edition (Topical Review Book), Girl Interrupted (Kaysen), Lovely Bones (Sebolt), One Flew Over The Cuckoo’s Nest (Kesey), College and Career Readiness materialsStand Alone ENL: Milestones Series (Heinle)ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Algebra I & II: eMath Instruction.com-Common core I & II (Parcc) Geometry: Common Core Library/EngageNY Units ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Global: World History Patterns of Interaction (McDougal Littell), U.S. History: The Americans (McDougal Littell)& original historical documents. ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Classroom exams/assessments are translated in Chinese and in Spanish. Living Environment: Biology (Miller and Levine), Earth Science: Heath Earth Science (Holt), Physical Setting Regents Review Practice Tests Based on NYS Core Guide (Topical Review) ENL instructional strategies and a variety of supplemental materials/texts including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used in all languages available. Teachers implement scaffolded lessons through the use of graphic organizers, academic language, research/writing projects and activities. Integrated Chinese textbooks. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? See Above. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. See #12 above. Students and teachers use approved grade-level materials that are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards in each subject area. All students in every class have equal access to all textbooks/materials. o Smartboards in every classroom o Media room with 20 computers and printer access during free periods and after school o Six mobile laptop carts for content classes o Fully automated library and access to databases in the native language 2018-19 CEP 58  o Discovery Education Software for teacher use o Edmentum blended learning o APEX online learning o Scholastic magazines o Translations, glossaries and translators 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELLs are invited to attend our Student Orientation in June for incoming students. This program provides information regarding the academic program as well as student-government developed ice breaker and team building activities. This orientation is offered again during the last week of August and includes tours of the building, a scavenger hunt and team challenges. Some content-area teachers, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals and schools aides are involved. School staff provide oral translations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish Levels 1, 2, 3, Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Literature and (online independent study) Mandarin Levels 1 and 2. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? RFK’s ELL Professional Development provides assistant principals, guidance counselors, subject area teachers, SWD teachers, the speech teacher, ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, secretaries and paraprofessionals with strategies for teaching English Language Learners and assisting ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school and ultimately, English proficiency. Professional Development is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction using ENL methodology and scaffold understanding. Faculty and staff also receive professional development in preparing students to take and pass NYS Regents Exams and meeting graduation requirements. • All teachers and guidance counselors have access to information regarding our ELLs. During the first PD session in September, we review NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results as well as strategies for working with students at different proficiency levels. • Professional Development will be facilitated by school administrators, the Network ELL Coaches and through outside workshops. The school-wide plan includes professional development conducted during our weekly Teacher Time, 2:05 to 3:25 pm every Monday and on Chancellor's Conference Days. During this time, a minimum of one Monday per month, for a total of 2018-19 CEP 59  11.5 hours annually, our ENL teachers and our content area ENL teachers turnkey training they have received during their PD sessions. Topics include: Understanding the NYSESLAT and New Proficiency Levels The ENL Instructional Program and Changes to CR Part 154 Assessing the Needs of our ELL Population Integrating Language and Content Instruction for ELLs Developing Academic Vocabulary Best Practices for Co-teaching Strategies Strategies for Helping ELLs Pass Regents Exams Teaching Literacy in the Integrated ENL Classroom Using WITsi/Hochman Writing Method Using Arts for ELLs and SWDs According to Cr Part 154 requirements, 15% of the annually required 175 hours will be devoted to the needs of ELLs. For ENL licensed teachers, 50% of the required hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core area instruction and best practices on strategies for co-teaching and integrating language and content area instruction for ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. See #1 above. Guidance Counselors are trained to provide support to ELLs transitioning from middle school to high school. Counselors visit ENL classes to familiarize students with graduation requirements and to address their specific concerns. Professional Development will be facilitated by school administrators, the Network ELL Coaches and through outside workshops. The school-wide plan includes professional development conducted during our weekly Teacher Time, 2:05 to 3:25 pm every Monday and on Chancellor's Conference Days. During this time, a minimum of one Monday per month, for a total of 11.5 hours annually, our ENL teachers and our content area ENL teachers turnkey training they have received during their PD sessions. Topics include: Understanding the NYSESLAT and New Proficiency Levels The ENL Instructional Program and Changes to CR Part 154 Assessing the Needs of our ELL Population Integrating Language and Content Instruction for ELLs Developing Academic Vocabulary Best Practices for Co-teaching Strategies Strategies for Helping ELLs Pass Regents Exams Teaching Literacy in the Integrated ENL Classroom Using WITsi/Hochman Writing Method Using Arts for ELLs and SWDs According to Cr Part 154 requirements, 15% of the annually required 175 hours will be devoted to the needs of ELLs. For ENL licensed teachers, 50% of the required hours will be dedicated to language acquisition and co-teaching strategies. RFK’s ELL Professional Development provides assistant principals, guidance counselors, subject area teachers, SWD teachers, the speech teacher, ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, secretaries and paraprofessionals with strategies for teaching English Language Learners and assisting ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school and ultimately, English proficiency. Faculty and staff also receive professional development in preparing students to take and pass NYS Regents Exams and meeting graduation requirements. 2018-19 CEP 60  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual annual parent meetings will be conducted on dedicated "Tuesday Parent-Engagement Afternoons" depending on what is most convenient for the parent/guardian. Tuesday afternoon meetings will be held during the time designated for parent outreach. All faculty and staff are present at that time and available to attend the meetings. If these times are not convenient, parents may schedule meetings during the regular school day or prior to other evening activities. For all meetings parents will be surveyed regarding interpretation needs. Interpreters will be provided when needed. Outreach to parents to schedule meetings will be done by telephone and letter, written in the parent's preferred language. A meeting summary form will be maintained for each meeting as a record of the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. New Student Orientation: Parents of ELLs are invited to attend the New Student Orientation in June. Staff translators are present to provide interpretation. Parents are provided with information regarding graduation requirements, extracurricular activities and the ENL instructional program • Monthly Mailings: Every month ELL parents receive a calendar of events, fliers describing school and parent activities and a letter from the principal • Parent-Teacher Conferences: Staff interpreters as well as contracted interpreters are available during the evening and afternoon conferences. Materials regarding academic intervention services and graduation requirements are provided in several languages. In September, parents experience their child's complete program on Curriculum Night. • Financial Aid Night and College Fair are held in the fall and winter. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate. We partner with the CUNY admissions office to provide parents with information regarding applying to college and completing the FAFSA. • PTA Meetings: Parents of ELLs are invited by to attend meetings and be part of the executive board and the SLT. The Parent Coordinator (LAC) is the liaison for all ELL parent activities. She uses Skedula/Pupil Path to inform parents of all upcoming events and activities. Skedula translates emails into the parents' preferred languages as indicated in ATS. *Interpretation services are provided to parents accordingly. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony D. Barbetta, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Robert F. Kennedy Community HS School DBN: 25Q670 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Barbetta Title Principal Susan Adams Assistant Principal Angela Miraglia Parent Coordinator Evangelina Ramirez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alex Fulgencio Parent Christina Apeler/ISS Math Teacher/Subject Area James Gildea/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michelle Arevalo School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Toskos Other Assistant Principal Monica Baiata/Spanish Other Teacher Steffy Tzupei/Mandarin/ENL Other Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/21/17 06/22/17 06/21/17 06/15/17 06/21/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/15/17 06/28/17 06/15/17 06/16/17 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q670 School Name: Robert F. Kennedy Community HS Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Miraglia Angela Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the following to assess written and oral language preferences of our parents: 1. For parents of students newly admitted to NYC schools we use information from the Home Language Identification Survey, including what languages are spoken or written at home by parents. 2. For all students we use the RHLA and the RCPL reports in ATS to identify the languages in which parents prefer to receive written and oral communication. 3. We are also able to obtain some information regarding parents' language from the Blue Emergency Contact cards. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN FRENCH GUJARATI GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI 6 0 15 14 166 0 6 9 2 1 2 4 KANARESE (A.K.A. KANNADA) 1 KOREAN MANDARIN ENGLISH PASHTO (A.K.A. PUSHTO) PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) POLISH RUSSIAN SENUFO SPANISH TAMIL URDU UKRAINIAN 15 0 549 14 1 3 0 17 1 211 1 25 5 0.56 0 1.4 1.31 15.54 0 0.56 0.84 0.19 0.09 0.19 0.37 0.09 1.4 0 51.4 1.31 0.09 0.28 0 1.59 0.09 19.76 0.09 2.34 0.47 4 1 16 14 98 3 6 7 2 1 4 4 1 15 64 533 19 1 3 1 18 1 217 1 28 5 0.37 0.09 1.5 1.31 9.18 0.28 0.56 0.66 0.19 0.09 0.37 0.37 0.09 1.41 0 49.95 1.78 0.09 0.28 0.09 1.69 0.09 20.34 0.09 2.62 0.47 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None 2018-19 CEP 65  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Sept./October 1. Principal's monthly letter to parents September, November, March, May -LAC will oversee that all necessary written and oral translations are made as needed. -School staff will provide oral and written translations as needed. - Over-the-Phone translations (NYCDOE Language Line services) will also be utilized and/or the Language ID Guide will be used -Will share Parent Guide to Language Access and "I speak..." Card. August, September/October and June 2. Letters for PTA meetings 3. Family Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences 4. College Night 5. Regents Exam notifications 6. Orientation Meetings 7. Freshman Orientation November January and June 8. Multicultural Festival-Spring Parent Conference September/October 9. NYSESLAT letter May 10. Other parent facing documents May April/May/September April/May Varies School Website Info. /Postings Throughout the year Google Translate-Parents may translate any or all information by selecting a language of their choice for translation n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? --LAC will oversee that all necessary written and oral translations are made as needed. -School staff will provide oral and written translations as needed. -Use of Multilingual Welcome Poster at the entrance of the school building - Over-the-Phone translations (NYCDOE Language Line services) also are being utilized, Language ID Guide -Curriculum Night -Parent-Teacher Conferences September Nov. & March and May (Multicultural Night -Teacher Conferences -Parent Engagement Activities, including face to face meetings with teachers and/or guidance counselors, psychology, IEP meetings. -Other over-the-phone conferences as needed. n/a n/a n/a Every Tuesday from 2:40 pm to 3:20 pm Varies n/a n/a n/a -Parent Guide to Language Access and "I speak..." Card. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 67  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Depending on the nature of the emergency, a phone master call would go out immediately in English, Spanish and in Chinese. Staff in our building will be reached out to provide oral and written translations if needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be informed by AP and LAC in the beginning of the year of CR- A-663 and explain the procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide training to our Parent Coordinator (LAC) and other key school-based staff on language access requirements. Parent Coordinator (LAC) will turnkey training and share parent-school accountability and make special announcements at PTA meetings of all events. Letters and announcements will be made and translated of all events held at our school. We added "Google Translate" on our school website so that all information posted can be translated in a plethora of languages. All parents/guardians will have the opportunity to attend and be involved. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At Parent Orientation Meetings/PTA Meetings, announcements are made by APs and LAC and translated by designated staff about parents' rights to receive translated materials. Parents will also be informed as they attend meetings, especially ENL meetings or events at school. In addition, the Welcome Poster is visible upon entry into the building as is the Language ID Guide. The Parents' Bill of Rights is posted on our website and distributed to students to take home to parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We informally informally survey parents regarding their need for and use of interpreters and translation as we meet with them throughout the year and especially when the HLIS is completed for new ELLs. Our LAC will try to create a 2018-19 CEP 68  focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. 2018-19 CEP 69 
