2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 28Q690 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY Principal: LAURA VAN DEREN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information HIGH SCHOOL FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY 342800011690 9-12 116-25 GUY R. BREWER BLVD. 718-977-4800 School Number (DBN): 28Q690 718-977-4802 Fax: Phone Number: LAURA VAN DEREN lvander@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: LAURA VAN DEREN VANCE GILLENWATER CHARM RHOOMES LAURA VAN DEREN SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: AKILAH SAMUEL TBD TBD n/a District Information Geographical District: 28 JUAN MENDEZ Superintendent: 30-48 LINDEN PLACE FLUSHING, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7577 Phone Number: 718-281-7696 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  QUEENS SOUTH MARLENE WILKS FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 ROCKAWAY BLVD. OZONE PARK, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5854 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name LAURA VAN DEREN VANCE GILLENWATER CHARM RHOOMES AKILAH SAMUEL MYRA GUARDADO ANAIYA ABERNATHY N/A DANIELLE COCCIA CARROLYN THOMAS VIVIAN TERRY Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSA UFT PARENT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name PAULA DAVIS Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION : To provide students with a challenging standards driven academic program. In collaboration with the school community and various partners, students will be introduced to careers in law enforcement and public safety. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. INSTRUCTIONAL FOCUS: By engaging students in rigorous common core aligned learning experiences that require higher order thinking and support college and career readiness, students will earn credits and pass Common Core/ Regents examinations. High School for Law Enforcement and Public Safety is an academic comprehensive high school which prepares students for college and careers. We are extremely proud to highlight the theme of our school. We are the only school of its kind in the nation. The central focus of our school is “law enforcement and public safety” and this focus is infused throughout our instructional program. Law enforcement and public safety officials make classroom visits and attend speaker forums and career days. Our number one partner is the New York City Police Department (NYPD). Our students are involved in a range of activities sponsored by the NYPD including trips to the College Point Police Academy, NYPD Museum, NYPD Crime Lab, Floyd Bennett Field, and Police Plaza. We are proud of our NYPD Explorers Post, consisting of approximately one hundred and twenty students, who has won numerous awards in national competitions . We are the only school in New York City that is granted the privilege of graduating our students from One Police Plaza. In June 2018, Police Commissioner James O'Neill was our keynote keeping the tradition alive of having the current police commissioner be the keynote speaker at graduation. It is with pride that we graduate students, the majority who eventually enter the law enforcement and public safety workforces. For the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years, we are partnered with College Advising Corps. Parents, guardians, and students engaged in college information and financial aide meetings with our full time college advisor. Our partnerships allowed for multiple college visits including trips to Yale, SUNY Stonybrook, Princeton, St. Francis, SUNY Farmingdale, John Jay, and Monroe College. The College and Career Resource Center (CCRC) was open during lunch periods and after school so students could work on researching post secondary institutions, write applications and scholarships, apply for financial aid, and assist with matriculation support. A College Bridge Coach was hired to assist students, in particular our recent graduates, throughout the summer. At High School for Law Enforcement and Public Safety, we are committed to using guidance services, academic intervention services, technology usage, and intervisitation to support teaching and learning. We will continue to provide a college prepatory program including Advanced Placement and College Now courses. In the Spring of 2018, John Jay College hosted an Introduction to Criminal Justice course at our school and will be offering an additional course in the Spring of 2019. Area of Celebration from the Quality Review: ● 1.4: Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that support the academic and personal growth of students and adult The school's current status: Good Standing This designation is determined by the New York State Department of Education under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) Flexibility Waiver. STRENGTHS: 2018-19 CEP 10   Students take a role in setting and maintaining a positive school environment. Student voice is regularly heard during our bi-weekly Student Government Association (SGA) Meetings , resulting in decision making to initiate improvement. Our attendance and school improvement team (SIT) provide ongoing support for students.  Our graduation rate for the 2016-2017 school year was 80% and we anticipate 80% by August 2018.  Our attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 90%.  Ninth grade credit accumulation in June 2018 was 83% . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have about 30 current and former English Language Learners. One fifth of our students have Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs). This year, utilizing data analysis, we are continuing to encourage families to move their children from self-contained and pull out SETTS to integrated co-teaching (ICT) so that students can get the support from two teachers in their core classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. THE FRAMEWORK FOR GREAT SCHOOLS:  Our instructional focus is aligned to rigorous instruction. During the 2017-2018 school year, Instructional Support Staff from the Queens South Field Support Center supported the science teachers through professional development, modeling, and feedback. Our administrators and staff also participated in Principal plus One ELA and Assistant Principal plus one Math sessions. This year, we plan on continuing our professional learning by continuing to receive support from Queens South instructional leads and increasing the number of intervisitations across disciplines.  Effective School Leadership is also an area of celebration. This past year, we saw increased participation at our parent/guardian/ student grade meetings led by the principal and the cohort assigned assistant principal where information was shared about credit accumulation , graduation requirements, academic intervention services, and college and career readiness. By maintaining an Open Door policy, parents /guardians came in without appointments to speak to us about how their children are progressing. Recognition assemblies celebrating students and staff have also brought the school community together.  This year, we worked on improving the supportive environment indicators. Our United Federation of Teachers chair and a teacher committee worked with administration on developing a strategic, uniform school-wide code of ethics and discipline policy and we also added an additional dean position. We also encouraged more students to join student government where they have an opportunity to voice their issues and concerns. CHALLENGES/ key areas of focus: ● Increasing credit accumulation for our Cohort V students ● Increasing the passing percentages on the Living Environment and Algebra Regents Examinations ● Improving tone and climate through restorative justice practices ● Continuing to improve strong family/community ties by implementing strategies and programs to increase parental /student involvement 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q690 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 498 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 54 6 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 69.9% % Reduced Lunch 5.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.6% 22.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.79 3% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 85% 75% 78.6% 6.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YES YES No N/A 64 42 89.7% 3.0% 18.5% 61.2% 10.0% 3.8% 6 16% 10.7 N/A N/A 81% 81% 85.7% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s 2016-2017 Quality Review Report provided the following feedback with respect to rigorous instruction: School leaders have systems in place so that curricula are aligned and regularly reviewed, exposing all students to challenging academic tasks that promote college and career readiness. Also, there was evidence of students' meaningful and thoughtful work products which reflected high levels of rigor. Teachers provide students with verbal and written feedback that is actionable and timely. Teachers are making instructional decisions based on their assessment practices. The 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicated that teachers feel that they have the materials and resources that they need to service students. 1.3 Resource Allocation: The principal’s strategic leadership promotes organizational decisions that clearly support different levels of goals to constantly improve student outcomes and student progress(MOLP 2017-2018) 4.1 Teacher Feedback: Teachers benefit from an observation process that is grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching and allows for the implementation of effective instructional techniques (MOLP 17-18) However, as a school community, there is still work to be done in the area of rigorous instruction: 2018-19 CEP 13  Deepening instruction so that lessons reflect purposeful groups, challenging activities, differentiation, and rigorous questioning to extend student thinking  More student centered and less teacher centered instruction using tools such as Socratic seminars and rhetorical analysis supported using evidence from scholarly texts.  Designing uniform rubrics within departments.   Managing and fine tuning the variety of assessments that are aligned to the curriculum and that are Incorporating explanatory writing across the curriculum consistent across classrooms. This will enable teacher teams and individual teachers to adjust instructional decisions and increase student performance(MOLP 17-18) The school’s Regents data identified the following trends:  The Living Environment pass rate for January/June 2018 administrations was 43% ( June 2017 39%). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August 2019, we anticipate a 15% increase on the passing percentage for the Living Environment Regents Examinations as measured by the Living Environment Regents scores. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Living Environment teachers will design curricula and adjust unit plans aligning them to the Common Core shifts. Interdisciplinary writing assignments will require students to use evidence to support their writing in all subject areas. Living Environment teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Living Environment teachers will attend off site and in-service professional development provided by Queens South, including sending lead teachers to core area sessions. The administration will provide regular in-house professional development that focuses on rigorous instruction, unit and curriculum writing, student engagement strategies, tracking data, adjusting instruction, and increasing credit accumulation. All teachers, specifically Living Environment teachers As provided by the DOE / Monday and Tuesday afternoons/ September 2018-June 2019 Administration Administration The administration will provide continuous professional development on enhancing student cognitive engagement, student to student discussion, using formative/summative assessments and rubrics, and higher order questioning techniques. All teachers Mondays/ Tuesdays professional learning sessions Administration / teachers Science teachers will meet weekly during common planning time to collaborate. Teacher teams will analyze tasks and student work using engagement, rigor, and assessment as the lens. Science teachers will engage in the inquiry cycle of analyzing data, using data to adjust instruction, and assessing students to provide students with cognitively rigorous instruction. Science teachers will discuss and monitor lab completion for Regents exam qualification. This data will be posted in each science classroom. Administration will engage in observation cycles with teachers, providing feedback on lesson and instructional practices. Using the Danielson Framework as a lens, administrators will support teachers to ensure that their lessons plans are aligned to the NYS/ Common Core learning standards. The Assistant Principal - Science will monitor student progress via assessment data, classroom observations, and student interfacing. The administration will review living environment curriculum maps and unit plans in the Google Drive to ensure rigor, appropriate pacing, and alignment to the standards. Throughout the year, administrators will support science Science teachers Science teachers Mondays during professional learning / common planning time September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- May 2019 Administration Administration Science teachers Sept 2018-May 2019 Administration 2018-19 CEP 15 teachers in revising and adjusting curriculum and lesson plans based on student data and classroom observations. Science teachers will continue to utilize technology in the classroom to help students master rigorous instruction and differentiate for learning styles. Science teachers will work on developing lesson plans that provide students with multiple entry points to differentiate for student learning styles( i.e. vocabulary support, question stems). The use of multiple entry points will also support students to navigate rigorous content. Science teachers will also use Regents Constructed Response questions within lessons daily for formative assessments. The school will provide extended day tutoring, Wednesday through Friday, and Saturday school to support students. During this time, students will have the opportunity to work with teachers on labs, homework, Regents review, and classwork. Students who previously failed the Living Environment examination will be placed into either a three/ four term sequence. Parents/Guardians will also be provided workshops about the Living Environment Regents exam, high school graduation requirements and college and career expectations. Parents/guardians will also be provided with information on various websites ( i.e. Khan Academy, Castle Learning) to provide their students with Regents/ Common Core support. All teachers, especially SPED science teachers Students Parents/ Guardians Mock Regents Examinations to expose and prepare students for the Living Environment Regents exam will be administered. Students Science teachers will use an online grading system (IO Education) to track and monitor student progress. The system will be used to communicate with students and parents about clear expectations for academic performance. Additionally, the data from IO Education will be used to target at risk students and provide additionally support in the form of after school/ Saturday tutoring. Teacher teams will identify students in the lowest third and work to develop a strategic plan to support students in this subgroup. Science teachers will brainstorm and implement strategies to provide both academic and social emotional supports and ensure that students in the lowest third have the opportunity to successfully navigate the rigorous Living Environment curricula. Students/ Science Teachers Students/ Teachers Science teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Oct 2018 -June 2019/ Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:25 - 3:25 pm August 2018-May 2019 Administration Guidance counselors/ teachers/ administrators November 2018/January 2019 Teachers/ administrators/ data specialist April 2018/ May 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019/ available daily Teachers/ Administrators/ Guidance Counselors on-going administration September 2018 - June 2019 Science teachers will complete intervention plans for non-performing students. Students will also create their own self-assessment plans for academic success. Students/ Science Teachers November 2018 - June 2019 Administration 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Cohort parent/guardian meetings led by the Principal and the Assistant Principal for the designated cohort will take place each semester in which rigorous instruction, academic intervention services, credit accumulation, and college and career readiness indicators will be discussed. By using Pupil Path, parents will be informed via anecdotals and posts about science supports available for their children. Teachers will continue to make contact with families regarding performance during parent engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Recruitment of sufficient Academic Intervention Services tutors and Saturday school staff (approximately 2 teachers/ per session and an administrator to oversee these programs)  Per-diem for staff to attend Professional Learning Opportunities  Prescribed PD schedule on Monday afternoons  Monthly parent engagement calendar of activities on Mondays from 2:20 - 3:00 pm  Common planning time for uniform exam creation and item analysis  Castle Learning licenses / ILearn licenses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teacher teams will regularly meet to analyze student work, tasks, lessons, and scholarship. Teacher teams will  use data to make adjustments to instructional practice. Supervisors will assist and support teacher through the observation cycle, providing in-person feedback on lesson plans and instructional practices.  During classroom observations, administrators will look for evidence of curricular adjustments, increased rigor, HOT questions, differentiation, multiple entry points, and Regents/Common Core aligned rubrics. By January 2019, after analyzing mid-year scholarship report and final/mock exam results, the anticipated passing rate for students on Living Environment mock exams will increase by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Living Environment Regents Exam questions will be used as midterms and final exams each semester. Interim scholarship reports will also be analyzed for success patterns each marking period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  The number of Principal's Suspensions and Superintendent Suspensions for the 2017-2018 school year decreased by 35%  The number of level 4 and 5 incidents for the 2017-2018 school year decreased 22%  Student Government is actively involved in the school community; representatives participate in bi-monthly meetings with school staff.  A College Career Pathway for every grade has been developed by the administration, guidance counselors, and college counselor. The administration and counselors support students by engaging them in goal-setting conferences, organizing on-site and off-site college visits, organizing Career Day, assisting in the college application process, and disseminating information about work-based learning such as internships and community service. Needs:        Increase the amount of students who are known well by at least one adult in the school who can advise them as they progress through high school. Increase the opportunities for students to have their social emotional concerns adequately addressed. The school has two guidance counselors to serve a student population of close to 500 students. The staff to student ratio limits the amount of time school personnel have to fully address the social emotional needs of students. Increase the student to student discourse in and outside of the classroom which inspires greater academic achievement. Increase students' opportunities to hear from school alumni about the rigors of college to help bring their perception of life after high school into reality. Increase opportunities for peer to peer tutoring across grade levels. Improve students' perception of classroom behavior and teachers' classroom management. Increase the number of the number of student led events that support academic growth, equity, and excellence.  Decrease the number of Principal and Superintendent Suspensions.  Decrease the number of Level 4 and 5 infractions Policies, Practices, and Structures:  Every member of the school staff will be asked to identify ten students of which they become an adviser.  We will seek a Community Based Organization partner in order to bring additional mental health services to the school building at least two days per week. 2018-19 CEP 18   Teachers will be provided professional learning opportunities to help increase the number of strategies they have for facilitating rigorous discussion in the classroom.  Teachers will be provided professional learning opportunities to help plan rigorous group projects and interdisciplinary projects for students to gain skills collaboration.  We will host an Alumni Breakfast featuring the Class of 2018 to come back and share their first semester experiences.  The AP of School Culture and Climate will meet with a focus group of students weekly to assess student perception and the reality of classroom behavior and teachers' classroom management.  The AP of School Climate and Culture will work with the Coordinator of Student Activities to ensure that we increase the number of school events and activities and are turning more responsibility over to students.  We will pilot restorative circles in classrooms of the teachers that have been trained. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will implement restorative justice practices which will result in a 12% increase in the percentage of students who will agree or strongly agree that school is providing a supportive environment. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Students will be regularly exposed to information in class and during assemblies which will address anti-bullying, cyber bullying, Respect for All, productive citizenship, internet responsibility, mediation strategies/conflict resolution, and crime prevention. Students will be taught the importance of how anything written on social media can have repercussions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students October Administration 2018 through May 2019 during monthly class assemblies Every Tuesday September 2018-June 2019 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - May 2018 Administration Administration/ Mental health liaison Administration A student focus group will be created on Supportive Environment 5-7 students from each grade The Department of Health Mental Health Liaison housed at our building will work with our deans, guidance counselors, and school psychologist to conduct assemblies and participate in parental meetings. All students October Teachers will be provided professional learning opportunities to expose them to best practices in facilitating rigorous discussion in their lessons and planning group interdisciplinary projects. All Teachers/ Students During Town hall meetings for each grade, the administration will discuss student achievement goals, conflict resolution, and Respect for All. Trained personnel will organize and execute restorative circles in their classrooms. All students/staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Trained staff/Select students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will invite parents in once per month to meet with the administration of the school to discuss their observations around safety, classroom behavior, and bullying. During these meeting, we will take suggestions and 2018-19 CEP 20  provide monthly updates on progress. The Assistant Principal - Security and Pupil Personnel Services will oversee the implementation of these changes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Assemblies- schedule adjustments - Per session for counselors and for staff attending providing additional social emotional support to students (per diem for teachers/guidance counselors to attend professional learning opportunities). - Per session for teacher collaboration on interdisciplinary projects. - Student celebratory events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Discussions with mentor supervisors concerning student progress. Progress reports will be given to students, as needed. - Bi-weekly meetings with teachers of Restorative Circles - Review OORS suspension and infraction reports on a monthly basis. - Frequent visits to classrooms to evaluate both curricular and behavioral management. By January 2019, data from a school created survey focused on Supportive Environment will be administered to all students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, the data from the school created survey focusing on Supportive Environment will be analyzed and compared with the data from June 2018 school survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-2017 School Quality Guide shows that teachers are working to meet the development needs and learning interests of their students. The students indicated that they see more diversified materials being utilized in instruction. teachers believe there has been increased opportunity for teachers to meet and discuss with each other. The 2016-2017 Quality Review Report indicated that school leaders have developed an observation system that supports the development of teachers. Frequent cycles of observation by school leaders provide teachers with regular written and oral feedback, including clear expectations fro teacher practice, and detailed suggestions for growth. The school has a shared instructional vision that is reflected in data based goals. ● The school is working on creating uniform departmental rubrics to assess common core aligned tasks. ● The majority of teachers are engaged in structured professional development connected to school-wide goals. ● Teacher teams are organized by content and grade level. However, the mathematics teacher teams are inconsistent with analyzing student assessment data and using benchmark results to effectively change instruction, particularly in mathematics. The school’s data for the 2017-18 academic school year indicates a 20% passing percentage for Algebra 1 ( Jan/June 2018 results). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August 2019, we anticipate a 25% increase in the students’ passing percentage on the Common Core Algebra 1 examination by mathematics teachers improving their collaboration, participating in intervisitation, and working toward continuous pedagogical improvement as measured by the Algebra Common Core Regents results and teacher scholarship reports. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The lead teacher of mathematics will attend off site professional development sessions and turn key this information to the mathematics teachers. The Special education math lead will continue to attend AP + 1 professional development sessions with the AP in charge of Math. Administrators will provide regular in house professional development which will focus on revising curriculum maps, lesson adjustments, shifting of classroom practice to enhance student outcomes, and Common Core Algebra preparation, particularly in Parts II and III. Math teachers will continue to implement writing in math by using tools such as sentence frames to prompt written analysis. Teachers will meet weekly to collaborate in their teacher teams. and during common planning time. Teams will analyze rigor and writing in instruction and the resulting student work. They will adjust curriculum, lessons, units, and classroom practice accordingly. During observations, administrators will monitor increased writing in mathematics, curricula adjustments, and the consistent usage of actual Regents based questions. Math labs will be created during Saturday School and after school tutoring to target students' specific areas of deficiency, including SWDs and ENLs. Level One and Two ninth graders will be mandated for numeracy lab provided during after school tutoring. Saturday school will be offered in January, May, and June. A baseline assessment and Mock Common Core exams will be administered at least three times per year; the data will be used to drive instruction. Math teachers October Administration 2018-May 2019 Administration Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration All teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration All Algebra students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration / math teachers Math teachers will participate in inter-visitations to share and discuss best practices. They will also be supported by the Queens Field Support Center Math Instructional Specialist. All math teachers TBD Administrators/teachers Incoming 9th graders will be assessed to determine academic needs. Based on the Algebra diagnostics, students will be programmed to take Algebra 1 over two, three, or four semesters. Students Sept 2018 Guidance Counselors/ Math Teachers/ Administration 2018-19 CEP 23 Using research based protocols, math teachers will meet in their department to present lesson plans and receive feedback from colleagues. The teacher who presents the lesson will use the feedback to adjust instructional practice and analyze student data to determine its efficacy. Teachers will include online resources as part of the curriculum to differentiate for all students: AMAPS ,Khan Academy, and New Visions. Accessibility to online resources will provide students with support outside of the classroom to increase Algebra I proficiency. Math teachers will meet in department teams to identify at-risk students. Round table conferences will be organized in conjunction with administrators, guidance counselors, students, and parents to discuss strategies to support students. math teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and administrators Teachers, parents, and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and administrators Parents and students Oct 2018-June 2019 Teachers/ programmer/ administrators/ guidance counselors Teachers will complete intervention plans for non-performing students. Students will also create their own self-assessment plans for academic success. Teachers and students October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators/ Teachers/ Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/Guardians will be informed of the importance of students using Khan Academy and Castle Learning at home to assist with their difficulties in math. Parents will be informed via school letters and PupilPath of academic intervention services available to support their children. The Assistant Principal for Mathematics will conduct a workshop for parents as they also struggle with providing the mathematical supports for their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Topical Review Books in Algebra /software(Eduware and Castle Learning)/Mock Common Core exams scheduling/ Saturday school per-session ( two math teachers instead of one on Saturdays)/Academic Intervention Strategies tutors ( three days per week / one hour per day/ two teachers). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In the Fall 2018 semester, students will take a Mock Regents exam as their mid-term and final examinations. These results will be analyzed and used to further shift instruction and classroom practice. 2018-19 CEP 24  ● In January 2019, students will take additional Mock Regents exams in class and during Saturday school. These results will also be analyzed for evidence of instructional shifts and changes in classroom practice. ● Curriculum maps and unit plans will be reviewed for CCLS alignment and evidence of instructional shifts. Administration will provide feedback on curriculum maps/unit plans. By February 2019, Mock Regents exam results and scholarship reports will be reviewed to analyze trends regarding increased student performance on the Algebra Common Core exam by at least 15%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents Exam results / in-class benchmarks/ scholarship reports/ baseline assessment data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Across the school, all grades have improved their credit accumulation during the 2017-2018 school year. Across the school, the majority of the Regents passing percentages improved; the biggest gain being in Global History. Needs: Cohort V (Class of 2020) has the lowest percentage (67%) of students accumulating 10+ credits by June for the 2017-2018 school year. Cohort V has 20 students with six or less credits after two years of high school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, credit accumulation for year three students will increase by 10% as measured by teacher scholarship reports. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work collaboratively to plan, assess, and adjust instruction to increase students’ academic achievement. Cohort teachers will work in teacher teams to identify students at risk using scholarship data, attendance data, and observations. Students who fail multiple classes will be placed on academic probation. They will be closely supervised and monitored with respect to academic progress. The school will provide additional academic supports during after school tutoring and Saturday school. All students Sept 2018- June Administration 2019 At risk students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration/ Teachers November 2018- June 2019 Administration All at-risk students including ELLs, students with disabilities, and overage and under credited students. Holdover ninth and tenth graders will be identified and placed in our newly created advisory program. These students will be monitored for academic progress and disciplinary concerns The school will organize roundtable conferences to discuss specific student’s progress. Parents/ guardians, teachers, guidance counselors, and the student will be invited to engage in the conversation to discuss strategies for academic and behavioral improvement. Saturday school will take place in December/ January and May/ June. The program will provide students with the opportunity to be tutored, to participate in credit recovery, and to make up labs. The extended day program (Wednesdays through Fridays, 2:25 – 3:25) will provide academic intervention services to all students. Year one holdovers Sept 2018- June 2019 daily All at-risk students Tuesdays from 2:20 - 3:00 pm October 2018-June 2019 Administration/ credit recovery teachers/ guidance counselor Guidance Counselors All students Saturdays during December/Jan/May/ Administration / teachers June All students Oct 2018-June 2019 Administration/teachers 2018-19 CEP 27 The school will organize mock regents to expose and prepare students for the Regents exams. All students Nov/Jan/ Students will participate in class assemblies to discuss available supports and strategies to assist students with credit accumulation. Parents will be invited to grade level or parent/ guardian meetings and engage in discussion on how to support their children with respect to credit accumulation. May/June monthly Selected students Administration/ guidance/ teachers/ testing coordinator Administrator/ guidance iLearn credit recovery will be implemented during the Spring Term for students to recover credits. Eligible students as needed Students will engage in assemblies to discuss high school graduation expectations (i.e. credits and Regents). Students will also learn how to read a transcript. year one and two students twice/year Administration/ school programmer/ ilearn coordinator Administration/ Guidance Counselors Students will meet with their guidance counselors to review their academic progress and discuss ways to be on track with respect to credit accumulation All students twice /year Administration/ Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will play a vital role in their creation of and participation in the credit recovery program. Contracts will be signed and maintained. Pupil Path will also be utilized as a major communicative tool. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. o Funding for iLearn site licenses for on-line credit recovery program o Per- session for Saturday School, Extended Day Tutoring and iLearn  Renewal of Castle Learning site licenses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  In January 2019, students will take Mock Regents/ final exams. Teachers will analyze and use this student data to shift instructional practices to help students obtain 10+ credits. By February 2019, teachers will have had over 40 sessions of professional development and/ or time to meet and collaborate with their departments. During this time, teachers will review student work and student scholarship reports and identify projected credit accumulation percentages. Teachers will use this data to identify at risk students and develop academic intervention plans. During the fall semester, the school will use multiple forms of assessments such as uniform midterms and finals, and in class formative and summative assessments, to identify progress for students accumulating 10+ credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By January 2019, scholarship reports for the end of the fall semester will show that at least 55% of year three students will have earned at least five credits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Snapshot Attendance Data: - 2012 - 91% - 2013 - 89% - 2014 - 89% - 2015 – 92% - 2016 - 91% - 2017 - 89% - 2018 - 90% The school’s communication with and notification to parents/guardians had kept our average attendance rate at 90%. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: Strengths: Teacher outreach to parents - 85% Parent - teacher trust 85% Needs: Parent involvement in school 69% Parent-principal trust 83% Student-teacher trust 72% 2018-19 CEP 30  Strengths: College Advising Corps Advisor has brought in parents and students to work together on college applications and FASFA completion/ school has partnerships with NYPD, the 113th precinct, the Queens District Attorney's Office, CUNY Men Teach, and various universities including John Jay, Monroe, and York Colleges. Needs: Increased parental participation at Parent Association, SLT, and cohort informational meetings/ increased participation by students in student activities/ build upon trust among administrators, parents, staff, and students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all students and all parents will have participated in at least one school based meeting, community based service project, or after-school activity. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Association Meetings will be attached to events that parents have attended in the past, where applicable ( Talent Show, Cohort Meetings...). Student Government Association will be actively involved in the planning and preparation for all school-wide events To build community, parents/guardians will be regularly informed of their child's academic performance. IO Education will be utilized by teachers to post grades and attendance information. This web based system allows parents to log on and monitor the students’ grades and attendance in real time. Increased use of anecdotals by teachers will be implemented. All students/ families TBD Administration All students/ families bi-weekly Principal Students/families/ teachers Daily Administrators The school will conduct weekly attendance meetings to address lateness, absence, truancy, and planning interviews. All students All families Attendance team Every Thursday period 2 Oct 2018-May 2019 Administration/ guidance/ The Tuesday parent engagement series " Coffee or Tea with LVD" will be advertised on the school website and via school messenger so families can have the opportunity to engage with the principal on a one on one or small group basis. Increased communication between the school and home via IO Education, Google classroom and Google Suites, school messenger, postings on the school website , and monthly mailings Entire school community September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 32 More daytime and weekend meetings will be held to support those parents who cannot attend night time activities. All students/ families tbd Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Police Athletic League /NYPD/ Baisley Housing / College Advising Corps/ AList/ CUNY Men Teach/ FDNY Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Increased number of home visits by attendnace teacher ( per-session) - Phone messenger contract - IO Education support and workshops provided during parent engagement Tuesdays - Recognition assemblies - Per-session for staff for weekend / after-school activities - Pending grant application approval for after-school activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Review of attendance data from ATS reports (i.e. RSNS, RCUA, RYMA) - Assessment of planning interview completion and approvals. - Weekly review of RCUA during weekly attendance meetings - Review of excel spreadsheet monthly which will log parent/student participation in after after-school meetings and activities Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019 , there will be a 40% participation rate by students and parents in school related activities as measured by attendance and log sheets 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Ninth grade students who earned a one or two on the eighth grade ELA Common Core State Exam have been scheduled for literacy lab. Students who need to take/ retake the ELACommon Core exam/ Students who are failing English based on scholarship report data/ students who need help developing their research and/or writing skills . Students who need additional preparation for the AP English Composition/English Common Core Examination. Ninth grade students who earned a one or two on the eighth grade Algebra Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Mandated AIS Literacy Lab Small group Small group Small group General tutoring on argumentative writing, grammar, and research Saturday School Mock ELA Regents Exam When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During extended day 2:25-3:25 pm ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) During extended day 2:25 -3:25 pm ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) Offered in December, January, May, and June (9am – 1pm) Mandated AIS Numeracy Lab Small group Small group During extended day 2:25 -3:25 pm 2018-19 CEP 35 Common Core State Exam have been scheduled for numeracy lab. General tutoring on solving equations ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) Saturday School Small group During extended day 2:25 -3:25 pm Mock Algebra Regents Exam Small group Small group Mandated Tutoring Saturday School Mock Science Regents Exams ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) Offered in December, January, May, and June (9am – 1pm) During extended day 2:25 -3:25 pm ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) Offered in December, January, May, and June Laboratory Makeups Small group and one-to-one in the science laboratories (9am – 1pm) Laboratory makeups and assistance with writing laboratory reports During extended day ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays) 2:25 - 3:25 pm Science Social Studies Students who need to take/ retake the Algebra Regents exam/ Students who are failing Math based on scholarship report data . Students who need to take/ retake the Algebra Regents exam/ Students who are failing Math based on scholarship report data Students who need to take/ retake the Living Environment, Earth Science, and/or Chemistry Regents exams/ Students who are failing science based on scholarship report data. Students who need to take/ retake the Living Environment, Earth Science, and/or Chemistry Regents exams/ Students who are failing science based on scholarship report data/ students who are missing labs. Students who are not meeting the science lab requirement to qualify to take the Science Regents examinations. Students who need to take/ retake the Global and/or United States History Small group Mandated Tutoring 2018-19 CEP 36 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Regents exams/ Students who are failing social studies based on scholarship report data/ Students who need additional preparation for the AP US History examination Students who need to take/ retake the Global and/or United States History Regents exams/ Students who are failing social studies based on scholarship report data Program services and recommendations in SESIS, as per student’s individual IEPS Review of scholarship report/ STARS/ Item Analysis Data/ teacher referrals Parent request/ review of scholarship and STARS data For all 9 thcredit recovery academy candidates Saturday School Mock Regents Exams Small group During extended day 2:20 -3:20 pm ( Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays) Offered in December, January, May, and June (9am – 1pm) 1:1 / small group As per IEP mandate Parent/ guardian/ teachers/ guidance counselor/ student Social worker / SBST 1:1 / small group/ whole group/ ( frequency) During extended day/ upon parent/guardian request or school request Upon request / during school day Daily Mandated related service counseling as mandated by the student’s IEP is divided between our two guidance counselors Round table conferences to address academic and behavioral concerns / conduct sheets assigned to students and progress reports given to staff for completion Initial evaluations Mentoring services and academic intervention services provided 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic Intervention Services / counseling/ bookbags with STH school supplies/ uniforms, as requested Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators attend hiring fairs seeking new teachers, including teaching fellows and experienced teachers (including ATRs). We provide New York state required mentoring. New and untenured teachers are provided with professional development. Administrators review resumes/cover letters submitted on the DOE online Open Market/ New Teacher Finder system to find highly qualified teachers. Administrators provide information to teachers regarding programs that are affiliated with local colleges and universities so teachers can earn the required number of credits for their permanent certification or to make themselves highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff will participate in ongoing professional development opportunities and programs within and outside the school building to support their continued professional growth. Many of these professional development activities are facilitated by our Field Support Center. The utilization of assessments both inside and outside the classroom are discussed during teacher team meetings and Professional Work/Learning conferences. Our testing coordinator / data specialist distributes and discusses data, including scholarship reports, so instructional shifts can be made. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 40  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The utilization of assessments both inside and outside the classroom is discussed during teacher team meetings and Professional Work/Learning conferences. Our testing coordinator / data specialist distributes and discusses data, including scholarship reports, so instructional shifts can be made. Data, assessments, and professional learning are discussed during our monthly Academic Policy committee meetings. Assistant Principals assign teachers in their departments to professional learning opportunities provided by the Field Support Center and central DOE. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5/6/7 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 217,014 0 0 x 2018-19 CEP 41  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 0 3,493,937 x Sections 5/6/7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 42   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Law Enforcement and Public Safety , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students High School for Law Enforcement and Public Safety will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; t Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School for Law Enforcement and Public Safety , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 46  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 47 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● always try my best to learn. ● 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name HIGH SCHOOL FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBL Borough Queens School Number 690 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal LAURA VAN DEREN Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher ALINA LOVASZ Teacher/Subject Area JENNIFER BRICOURT/ELA Teacher/Subject Area VANCE GILLENWATER/SOCIAL S Related-Service Provider DWAYNE PARKER Superintendent JUAN MENDEZ Assistant Principal DANIELLE COCCIA Coach N/A School Counselor IVETTE ECHEVERRIA Parent VIVIAN TERRY Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 515 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.50% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Most of our ELLs have been receiving services for at least two years. Even though our students have been progressing successfully, it is time for many of them to be able to pass the NYSESLAT and their English Regents/Common Core examinations. We have eleven expanding ENL students Our ELLs take the same formative assessments provided by the Department of Education ( i.e. teacher created assessments) as non-ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher receives copies of the formative assessments that will be administered to the ENLs. The ENL teacher collaborates with the general ed or special ed teacher with the creation of the assessment providing modifications to the format and/or the content of the test. Both teachers analyze the formative assessment results and devise strategies for 2018-19 CEP 52  reteaching skills and next steps. The ENL teacher reinforces the skills required to pass the formative and summative assessments through targeted classroom instruction in the stand alone setting. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We analyze NYSESLAT and biographical data reports. We also review scholarship reports and summative assessment data ( i.e. Regents/ Common core results) from STARS. For ENL students with IEPs, students are tested in September utilizing the Scantron Performance Series in Reading and Math. The ENL teacher administers and analyzes the results of unit examinations. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Among interventions provided to struggling ENL students are: study hall, after school tutoring program, and Saturday school. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following strategies have been implemented for those students who have been unsuccessful on the listening/ speaking components of the NYSESLAT: * Review of test-taking strategies during tutoring • Work with students on a more individual basis to build confidence on one on one and public speaking The following strategies have been implemented for those students who have been unsuccessful on the reading/writing components of the NYSESLAT: • The ENL teacher will continue to use common core aligned materials with scaffolding • The reading of more novels, non-fiction, document based texts, and short stories will be incorporated • Students will be encouraged to attend tutoring and our Saturday program • Additional writing strategies such as utilizing diagrams and graphic organizers will be implemented • Consistent review of basic writing components, essay review, and sentence framing During the 2016-2017 school year, we had one student who took the NYSITELL. This students tested as expanding and was programmed accordingly. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This information is shared with the data specialist, the Assistant Principal in charge of programming, the guidance counselor, and the programmer. They work in concert with the ENL teacher to determine the appropriate program for the student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 53  There are five students in our stand alone ENL program. There are two stand alone sections. One is for entering students only. the other section consists of entering and emerging students. These students are entitled to stand alone and integrated instruction by the ENL teacher Ms. Lovasz. The other students ranging from transitioning to commanding have integrated instruction in core classes provided by the ENL teacher contingent upon their mandates. Students are grouped according to proficiency and grade levels. The integrated instruction is in the core content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering students receive 540 minutes per week of ENL instruction both integrated and stand alone ( two stand alone and one integrated Monday - Friday). Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction both integrated and stand alone( one stand alone and one integrated period Monday - Friday). Each period is 45 minutes. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes per week of integrated instruction. Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of only integrated instruction. Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of integrated instruction. Both the integrated and stand alone instruction is provided by the ENL teacher in core subject areas. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All classroom instruction is delivered in English. English is the only common language among our ENLs. In the ENL classes, the development of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills is emphasized. The ENL teacher also works on test taking strategies with the students to improve their results on the NYSESLAT, Regents, or Common Core examinations. Research suggests that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language and English. As such, the ENL teacher provides native language support in all content area classes. Students have access to bilingual glossaries, translation programs, translated texts (where available), and bilingual libraries. In content classes, ENL students are grouped with mainstream students who speak the same language for native language support. Also, the ENL teacher supports the ENL students during integrated instruction. The ENL teacher modifies the task to conform to the student's proficiency levels. The ENL teacher also scaffolds for vocabulary acquisition. The ENL teacher works collaboratively across content areas to share ENL strategies to ensure that all ENLs will have full access to rigorous common core aligned curricula. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELLs are evaluated by the ENL teacher and our Spanish speaking guidance counselor (Spanish LAB, alternative language editions of the Regents.). We provide Regents exams in native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Currently, we have no SIFE students. Our approach to supporting SIFE students is to provide additional support. Teachers across all content areas use research based instructional strategies, technology, oral translations, and audio/translated texts. In addition, students are invited to attend one-on-one tutoring during their free periods during the school day to further strengthen their academic areas of need. We also increase our social and emotional 2018-19 CEP 54  support for these ELLs through our guidance department. The ENL and content area teachers also increase their communication with the parent of the identified students. b) Students who have been in the US schools for less than three years receive support in the native language through the translation of thematic units of study in the content areas, classroom buddies, classroom libraries, technology, and bilingual glossaries. Students are taught language functions as well as basic and Tier II vocabulary. They are provided print rich materials to support their content knowledge and oral language development. All students are offered tutorial services after the school day. c) For ELLs receiving service for 4 to 6 years, the focus is an explicit Tier II and Tier III vocabulary instruction, idiomatic expressions, intensive academic literacy skills building, and developing reading and writing stamina. Teachers across content areas incorporate building foundational skills for reading and analyzing informational texts, as well as writing opinions and arguments in their instruction. d) Instruction for Long Term ELLs includes: expanding on figurative language study, building academic language skills, focusing on reading and analyzing non fictional texts and writing opinions/arguments in response, strengthening note taking skills, and working with extended reading and listening passages. In addition to explicit vocabulary building and intensive academic literacy skills building, counselors and school support staff offer intensive social-emotional support to LTEs as well as increased outreach to their parents. e)Former ELLs are entitled to testing accommodations for years one and two after testing commanding. The ENL teacher also provides 90 minutes per week of integrated instruction in a core class for each student. Accommodations include extended time, use of bilingual glossaries, small group settings, and additional readings of the listening component of state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL teacher meets with the ELA Special Education teacher and the AP- SWD to modify lesson plans and make curriculum adjustments. The AP -SWD monitors that all mandated services both for ENL and SWD are met. Grade and age appropriate materials are provided to students. Students' IEP goals in math and ELA are discussed. The ENL teacher differentiates instruction by providing the SWDs with graphic organizers and glossaries . The ENL teacher utilizes technology daily and a computer is available in her classroom for the students to access information, translate information, and type their reports/ essays. Visual aids and a word wall are posted in the classroom. Native language glossaries are in the classroom library. Our school library also has a native language book collection. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher utilizes common core materials/reading selections and a newspaper for English Language Learners to accelerate English language development. The ENL students are placed in the least restrictive environment. For integrated instruction, the ENL teacher pushes into the General Education classroom to serve the ENL students in core classes. The LPT made the determination (where flexibility is allowed) to have our emerging and transitioning students have more integrated instruction in lieu of stand alone instruction. ENL students are placed in ICT classes as per their IEP mandate in SESIS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After school tutoring in English is available in all core subject areas for those ELLs in need of additional support. We also hold a Saturday program in January and in May/June to assist students with preparation for Regents / Common Core/ NYSESLAT examinations. Tutoring is also available in all subject areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we would like to work on strategies to improve parental involvement. We want to offer a workshop regarding the ELL curriculum and graduation requirements. 2018-19 CEP 55  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/ services for ENLs will be discontinued at this time. Some of these programs include tutoring and Saturday school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including honors and advanced placement classes. ELLs are encouraged to attend tutoring, enrichment, athletic, and general school activities. Their participation is monitored by the ENL teacher who reviews attendance records and checks SKEDULA on a regular basis. Our ELLs participate in various extra curricular activities such as art, basketball, baseball, theater, and dance events. Notifications of all offerings are distributed to ELL parents and students in English and in the students' native language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher utilizes the classroom computers and chrome books in her classroom. The ENL teachers follows the ELA, Common Core, Engage NY, and Collections. Glossaries and native language books are utilized according to the subgroup's needs. Scaffolded texts are utilized when students are reading novels and non-fiction texts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ELLs receive instruction exclusively in English, however, native language support is provided across content area classes. Resources used include bilingual glossaries, bilingual textbooks, as available, translated texts, bilingual libraries, peer translators, and bilingual audio/visual materials. Students are permitted to respond in their native language in classroom assignments as well as on state assessments. Google translate via Ipad is utilized in stand alone and integrated classes. Students are also grouped based on their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support services and resources are subject specific. They are not divided by age and/or grade levels . The resources are adapted according to the ENL's proficiency level. The ENL provides professional development to the staff regarding the use of the ENL supports when the ENL teacher is not in the classroom. She also shares resources with them via email and the Google Drive. During teacher teams, the ENL teacher rotates among teams and subject areas to ensure her students are progressing in their classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share services. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before ELL students begin at HSLEAPS, they are invited to attend a Summer Bridge Program in July, Meet and Greet in June, and a New Student Orientation in August to learn about the school, our programs, and our services. Translators are available upon request. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the only language elective offered at HSLEAPS. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 56  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In prior years, our ELL teacher has attended professional development provided by the Queens Field Support Center). She has attended trainings on instructional strategies and performance assessments. She also attends our weekly professional development sessions on Mondays. In September, the ENL teacher and Principal provided professional development training to all staff including the guidance counselors and SBST on the new ENL mandates. In October, the ENL teacher attended the first in a series of workshops provided by Queens South on enhancing literacy and vocabulary acquisition. This year, The ENL teacher attended professional development from Queens South on translation and interpretation services. In September, she will turn-key this information to staff including new ENL mandates. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teacher has been trained with our entire school staff on assisting students to successfully make the transition from middle to high school. The guidance counselors organize round table conferences for the families of ENL students. Interpretation services are available upon request. Professional development sessions on Mondays address strategies for assisting ELLs in their classes including teaching additional literacy skills and analyzing NYSESLAT data. Copies of all professional development agendas and attendance sheets are maintained in the Principal's office. The ENL teacher fluctuates among teacher teams to provide content specific ENL strategies. The ENL teacher has attended off -site professional development including Language Interpretation Services and the Nuts and Bolts of ENLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All parents are invited to attend our monthly PA meetings. Monthly letters are also sent home; many are translated into Spanish. Our school has not partnered with any agencies or CBOs to provide workshops to ELL parents. Our ENL teacher keeps in direct contact with our ELL parents and provides them with flyers / information re. DOE sponsored activities. We are holding our mandatory ENL parent meeting in November. Twice a year, grade level parent meetings are held during the evening. At the end of each of these meetings, parents and guardians are encouraged to meet with their child's guidance counselor and AP assigned to the cohort. At each meeting, the ENL teacher sets up a table and is available to meet with the ENL students' families individually to discuss their language development needs in content areas and assessment data. Over the phone interpretation services have bee utilized , as needed. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We are working on strategies to increase parental involvement. We do not have a parent coordinator. The Parent Association General Membership Meetings monthly agenda is mailed home in multiple languages (the DOE prescribed multi-lingual template is utilized). An annual parent/guardian meeting for ELLS is held in November. All ENL parents are invited to the Title I parent meeting in October. Documentation is translated and translators in French and Spanish are available on site. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laura Van Deren, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HS LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC School DBN: 28Q690 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laura Van Deren Title Principal Danielle Coccia Assistant Principal N/A Alina Lovasz VivianTerry Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jennifer Bricourt Teacher/Subject Area Vance Gillenwater Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Ivette Echeverria School Counselor Juan Mendez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dwayne Parker Other related services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q690 School Name: HS Law E Superintendent: Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alina Lovasz ENL teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home language / ethnicity reports from ATS are analyzed (RHLA / RCPL). Information is pulled from the Home Language Surveys. Emergency blue cards are distributed in English and Spanish. DOE literature and school documents/letters are regularly provided in both languages. Annually, all families receive a language preference sheet indicating the language they would like to receive written and oral communication from the school. The pupil accounting secretary regularly updates this information in ATS. Home language information is shared with the faculty. In Skedula, there is an option for messages being sent to families to be translated. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 61  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Of the 530 families at our school, according to the Parent's Preferred Language Report (RCPL), parents/guardians need communication in the following languages: ARABIC BENGALI English French Haitian-Creole Hindi Pilipino (Tagalog) Punjabi Spanish Urdu 1 11 .13 1 1.42 11 .13 1.42 618 80.05 616 79.79 1 4 3 1 .13 .52 .39 .13 1 4 3 1 11 1.42 11 .13 .52 .39 .13 1.42 2018-19 CEP 62  118 15.28 119 4 .52 5 15.41 .65 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure Parent-teacher conference announcements / letters, flyers, and memorandums created and distributed by the Department of Education/ As needed, documents that must be translated by the Translation Interpretation Unit will be delivered at least two weeks in advance of their distribution. September 2017 timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that need to be translated into Spanish are completed by either our Spanish teachers or our bi-lingual guidance counselor. DOE translated documents/templates are retrieved from the DOE website. For other languages, documents are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. Also, Big Word Translation 2018-19 CEP 63  will be used for document translation for non-covered languages. Language assistance will be provided for languages not spoken by school personnel by utilizing the Translation Interpretation Unit's Language Line. Over the phone interpretation services allow staff to communicate with limited English proficient parents in any language. To identify the unspoken language, parents/guardians will be shown the Language ID card so limited English proficient parents/guardians can identify their native language. Once the language has been identified, the school will request the proper interpreter from the Language Line. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 64  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent-teacher conferences / round table conferences/ monthly parent meetings/ orientations/ meet and greet / Title I meetings/ ELL parent meetings/ PA/ SLT tbd plan to provide interpretation service(s)? On staff, we have members who speak Spanish, Polish, French, Punjabi, Tagalog, and Haitian-Creole. For other languages, we call the Over the Phone Translation Interpretation Unit for translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Use of school messenger/ staff members to make direct calls in native language/ PupilPath messages in the native language/ use of Over the Phone Translation Interpretation Services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development was take place regarding the Over the Phone Translation Interpretation Unit/ information posted in lobby, in general office, and at security desk to be used as a reference tool Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 65  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents/ Guardians have been notified of the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site to find documents in multiple languages. This information has been shared at parent teacher conferences and is also available in the guidance offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather feedback during our monthly PA meetings. Also, we will work in consultation with the parent association to create a survey which will poll parents/guardians on the translation/ interpretation services available at the school. The survey will be mailed home to parents. 2018-19 CEP 66 
