2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75Q811 School Name: P.S. Q811 Principal: NICOLE AVILA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P 811Q 307500014811 K-12 61-25 Marathon Parkway 718-224-8060 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75Q811 718-224-5914 Fax: Janet Healy Jhealy1@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Penny Ryan SarinaRaffa Scott Faver Alison Middleton N/A KaitlynBrennan N/A District Information KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 1st Avenue New York, N.Y. 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1663 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Queens/D75 Jude Arthur FSC: Executive Director: Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Ave, NY, NY 10010 Aedelst@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1503 Phone Number: 212-802-1663 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Penny Ryan SarinaRaffa Scott Faver KaitlynBrennan Alison Middleton Maria Petkanas Todd Faude *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chairperson-staff member Member/Teacher Member/Occupational Therapist 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeannie Hackman SaineArroyave Lisa Hahn MaritzaTong Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P. 811Q is to promote challenging educational and functional opportunities that will enable all students to become participating fulfilled members of a multicultural society. This will enable students to maximize their independence and potential in inclusive environments within our public schools and the global community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.811Q is a school for students with multiple disabilities located in 9 sites throughout Queens, NY. We service students from K-12+ in 8 community school sites and one self-contained main site. P.811Q is one of twelve schools that were selected to be part of the Collaborative Schools Initiative along with our partner school Queens High School of Teaching. The program is designed to recognize, celebrate and share best practices among schools in the NYC DOE. Visitors learned how the school partners with families and the community. Additionally,811Q had been selected as one of forty-seven out of 1800 NYCDOE schools to be a Showcase School. The Showcase Schools program is designed to recognize, celebrate, and share promising practices across New York City Department of Education schools. The Showcase Fellows program seeks to acknowledge teachers with leadership qualities from each Showcase School and bring them together as a cohort of Fellows to develop their knowledge of adult learning and leadership skills. With the support of the Showcase team, Fellows honed these skills by designing and facilitating Showcase activities and by developing and curating artifacts that helped Showcase participants continue their learning. Visitors had the opportunity to think about how these practices could be incorporated into their own work. Showcase was held on 1/30/18 and 4/26/18. P.811Q has developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through the Danielson Framework and based on our school’s mission statement to provide our students with the skills to be as independent as possible while functioning in society. ● The School Professional Development Plan was developed by school members based on the Danielson Framework and MOSL. ● Teachers from each school unit, age group and ratio group consistently collaborated on Units of Study ● 9 school inquiry groups (Professional Learning Communities) ● Department Meetings I. Vocational School Focus: P.811Q students have designated a class logo to identify their classroom vocational learning focus that implements a cottage industry which offers a variety of services to the school and community. These industries are implemented in classes that traditionally find it challenging to participate in authentic work. ` 2.Communication Skills Across the Curriculum: Use of AAC (Aided and Augmentative Communication) devices for every student who is assessed and in need of an appropriate device and programmatic use in every environment of the school. 2. Use of differentiated daily individual student schedules, activity schedules/embedded work schedules, I-PADS and I talks for communication, job social scripts, District 75 Communication Profile for each student completed by Speech staff, SANDI Communication Assessment and Joint Action Routines (JARs) strategies for classroom routines 3. Technology Skills throughout the Classrooms - Because of the nature of our students’ abilities, technology is embedded into lessons, unit planning and instruction and use of Smart Board in every classroom for small group instruction. Development of e-books to support our literacy program, use of Classroom Suite software used to implement picture symbols into e-books , I-Pads for communication with Pro-lo-Quo to Go Software,I-touch used for communication during authentic work activities. Every non-verbal student has access to a personal AAC device for communication 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Curriculum- Use of Unique Learning, STEM, Eden, Equals, First Author, Edmark as materials to design Units of Study and Scope and Sequence for the school year. 5. Assessment Practices : A. NYSAA (New York State Alternate Assessment)- implemented for all eligible students for MOSL (Measures of Student Learning). Teachers groups collaboratively designed student work sheets and data collection steps to meet this year’s activities aligned to the CCLS. B. SANDI/FAST (Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory)- completed on every alternate assessment student in P.811Q. Baseline assessment collected and analyzed to determine individual IEP (Individual Education Plan) goals for each student. SANDI assessment helped to drive instruction aligned to CCLS and used to create meaningful assessment driven goals. Coherent instruction is evident throughout the school utilizing SANDI for CCLS aligned IEP goals, Units of Study based on assessment, lesson plans and instruction. Our focus for next year is to implement our instructional strategies to ensure improvement in ELA and Math. C. All assessment data for every student is collected in a Student Binder. D. Student friendly rubric has been created in which expectations, performance and next steps are noted and assessed using an age appropriate, star system. Students can utilize rubric to self- assess. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 92% of our students participate in Alternate Assessment. Our school services a special education population that includes students with autism, physical and intellectual challenges. Students are grouped by ratio in either 12:1:1, 12:4:4, 8:1:1 or 6:1:1 classes. Our students need curriculum adaptations, small groupings, specific special education strategies to master their Individualized IEP goals. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. All instruction is based on our collaborated CEP (Comprehensive Educational Plan) goals which focus on communication, vocational skills and assessment driven instruction. The element of trust is interwoven into all of our programs and we focus and developing a trust with our parents who entrust their children to us and develop a trust with students so that they feel safe in our community programming. P811Q has made a great deal of progress addressing Framework for Great Schools elements: 1-Effective School Leadership, Trust Since P.811Q was selected to be a Showcase school for the 2017-2018 school year, The focus was on implementing special education best practices with an emphasis on our successful school vocational program. Visitors learned how P 811 successfully assesses students’ strengths and preferences in order to design instructional and practical experiences that develop students’ proficiency and independence over time. Visitors saw how students' interests and work experience are woven into the social studies, ELA, and math curricula. The showcase events took place on Jan.30, 2018 and April 26, 2018. 2018-19 CEP 11  The School Professional Development Plan was developed by school members based on the Danielson Framework and MOSL. It was distributed to all staff as a well-planned, transparent system of providing teacher development support. P.811Q has developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through the Danielson Framework and based on our school’s mission statement to provide our students with the skills to be as independent as possible while functioning in society. Instruction is individualized and adapted to meet the strengths and needs of all students. The Danielson Framework for Teaching is used as a guide to elevate our classroom practices and increase our shared understanding of effective instruction. ADVANCE feedback used to improve teacher instructional practice. Teachers used the Danielson Framework to design their individual professional goals, where they need and want to improve their instructional practices, in addition to individual planning conferences where teachers and supervisors had conversations on professional goals. All staff has had the opportunity to participate in teacher-led professional development and Professional Learning Committees on staff initiated instructional needs including instruction, behavior, communication and transition. Our focus to address this element in the 18-19 school year will be to analyze the Danielson, #3d, by making assessment coherent for every student through effective professional development and instructional training. 2- Collaborative Teachers,Trust ● Teachers from each school unit, age group and ratio group consistently collaborated on Units of Study for the entire school year. Units were designed by teachers for 12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1 and 12:1:4 classrooms and is an ongoing professional activity. ● 9 school Professional Learning Communities Inquiry groups worked on effective instruction in behavior, health and fitness, prompt dependency, student response time, communication goal writing across environments, SMILE implementation, First Author implementation. ● Department Meetings-review student work, strategies for instruction and assessment. ● A pacing calendar was designed by teachers for monthly Units of Study/Scope and Sequence. ● New teachers collaborate with senior teachers, coach to plan classroom inter-visitations. ● Teacher-led Professional Development: SMILE (Structured Methods in Language Education), Behavior, Technology, IEP goal writing. Collaboration between Speech Department and Teachers using the Joint Action Routine Strategies (JARS) for lessons. This year, the collaboration will focus on the ELA instructional area of Writing in which teachers will work on appropriate implementation of the First Author in our classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 12  3-Supported Environment-, Trust P.811Q students are well supported in vocational training for effective post secondary transition. Each class has designated a class logo to identify their classroom vocational learning focus. Each class has an identified implement of a cottage industry which offers a variety of services to the school and community. These industries are implemented in classes that traditionally find it challenging to participate in authentic work. A directory of services is positioned at the front doorway of the school to give visitors the clear understanding of what our school is all about. Cottage industry workshops of authentic jobs include: Hair salon, Meena's Nails, building maintenance, cafe service, food pantry, a working garden, card shop, bicycle repair and lunch delivery service. Our focus on this element for this year is to develop an appropriate, implementation of works skills through the use of task analysis strategies which will better support our students in the work environment Students will be supported to participate in self-assessments of their community work experiences. 4-Strong Family Community Ties-Trust P. 811Q has successfully utilized the Title III Program to increase parent engagement especially for ENL students using communication training in school and at home. We have brought parents into the school, gone to their homes and provided training 1. Use of AAC (Aided and Augmentative Communication) devices for every student who is assessed and in need of an appropriate device and programmatic use in every environment of the school and home. 2. Use of differentiated daily individual student schedules, activity schedules/embedded work schedules 3. Use of I-PADS and I Talks and I-Touch for communication in school and the home and parent training on use of the device. 4. Use of on-the job social scripts in the community and sent home for parent use. 5. District 75 Communication Profile for each student completed by Speech staff 6. SANDI Communication Assessment to assess communicative needs of students. 7. Joint Action Routines (JARs) strategies for classroom routines. 8. Because of the nature of our students’ abilities, technology is embedded into lessons, unit planning and instruction. 9. Use of Smart Board in every classroom for small group instruction. 10. A full library of e-books to support our literacy program with digital and hard copies sent to the home. 11. Classroom Suite software used to implement picture symbols into e-books 2018-19 CEP 13  Our focus for the 18-19 school year is to increase home and community engagement by using teleconferencing to bring in participation of parents and community representatives who cannot come down to the school. 5-Rigorous Instruction-Trust Implementation of the Unique Learning System which provides a framework for all of our teachers to implement content and age appropriate lessons aligned to the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards). All teachers follow the Unique Yearly Units of Study to design their own classroom units of study. The vocational content of Unique is aligned to CDOS (Career Development Occupational Studies )across all environments and all lessons are differentiated. ● Implementation of the Equals math program for students in alternate assessment  Implementation of SMILE, Edmark, First Author, Wilson Reading, Fundations The Vocational Skills Program is a major focus of our curriculum. Students are assessed utilizing the Level I and II Vocational Assessment and SANDI to implement an authentic work program. Each middle and high school grade class has a specific vocational focus work program that is integrated into the daily curriculum. Vocational skills include in-classroom cottage industry, in-school work, and community based work sites. Students use Embedded Work Schedules, self-assessments and communication devices during all vocational work experiences. ● Pedagogical Teaching Strategies : multiple entry points are provided to meet the learning needs of our students into specific teaching strategies that utilize:  Technology-computers, Smart Boards, I-Pads, I-Touch, PECS (Picture Exchange System), VIZZLE, visuals, Mayor-Johnson Symbols and Classroom Suite. All non-verbal students have an individual communication device, in addition to programmatic devices in the classrooms, cafeteria and office of the school.  Naturally occurring routines are embedded into the curriculum through the use of classroom and individual schedules, arrival, departure, mealtime, swim, vocational and leisure routines, small group instruction, differentiated instruction.  This year's focus will be on developing writing skills through the First Author Program 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q811 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 417 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 3 School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 81.1% % Reduced Lunch 22.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.6% 27.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 1.2% 99.8% 33.3% 19.2% 5.3% 8 4% 8.5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: As of June, 2018, PD Workshops were completed this past year that addressed strategies for implementing curriculum: SANDI Leveling and Lesson Planning-10/2 and 10/3, 10/16, 10/17   Prompting (Response)- 11/20,  Prompting (Stimulus- 11/21   Data Training-12/11, 12/12  Data Analysis-12/18, 12/19 Showcase preparation-Jan. 22,23,2018 Paraprofessional training: Stop & Think/Universal Language  How to Check Your DOE Email  Computer/Internet Access & Resources   What is an IEP?  What is an Annual Measurable Goal?  How to Access Sesis  How to Log in to Your 811Q Gmail Account  Response Prompting (CTLE) Stimulus Prompting (CTLE)   Data Collection (CTLE) 12/18/17 (77) main site  Reinforcement (CTLE) 3/12/18 & 353/19/18 (61) main site  Task Analysis (CTLE) 3/26/18 (75)  Backward Chaining (CTLE) 4/16/18 (76) Forward Chaining (CTLE) 4/23/18 (76)   Boardmaker Pt.1 (CTLE) 4/30/18 (77)  Types of Chaining Review (CTLE) 5/7/18 (74)  Boardmaker Pt. 2 (CTLE) 5/14/18 (49)  Google Suite Pt. 1 (CTLE) 5/14/18 (32)  Google Suite Pt. 2(CTLE) 5/21/18 (28)  Total Task Chaining (CTLE) 5/21/18 (60) 2018-19 CEP 16  As of June, 2018,an analysis of this goal data revealed 100% of alternate assessment students (378) in the entire school have been assessed utilizing SANDI in the areas of ELA (English Language Arts) and Math. Reading data reveals that out of 47 classes, 49% of classes attained a 1 point average increase in ELA, and 81% attained a one point or more average increase in Math on SANDI Assessment. 92% of students showed a one point increase on ELA scores, while 80% of students showed a one point increase in math . Our focus for next year will be a 5% increase of students scoring over 2% increase over this year's results. SANDI/FAST is aligned to our curriculum and teachers wrote IEP goals based on assessment in SANDI. As of June, 2018, ongoing review was done of student work with a unified STAR rubric to rate every piece of student work & provide feedback to students in terms of how successful they were & what the next steps should be. The rubric indicates the skill, expectation, next steps & comments. It includes “Try Harder” (1), “Approaching” (2), “Meeting Expectation” (3) & “Exceeding Expectation” (4). An analysis of the success of the STAR rubric has indicated that we will focus on making it a more appropriate student self-assessment by having students make “I” statements on the “Next Steps” part of rubric. The rubric was updated to better reflect the students' voices. Teams met regularly to analyze student work, data progress monitor & make revisions in both complexity & instructional strategies. The Unique Learning System is aligned to CCLS-Teachers adapt the curriculum further to meet the needs of their students. Teachers follow yearly units of study & develop units of study at the classroom level. NYSAA was completed on 135 students at P811Q in 2017-2018 school year. Professional Development has taken place and work was collaboratively reviewed by the teachers and is being aligned with the District75 rubrics by looking at student work in the form of worksheets, photographs and videotapes, and the teachers calibrated the student work using the rubrics. Teachers are utilizing specialized strategies in Literacy to create e-books.,Our school’s approach to aligning the Math CCLS is to focus on the functional, adaptive uses of Geometry and Algebra in lives of our students. Therefore, the school has created a functional list of activities that address high school CCLS in math (Algebra and Geometry). Each teacher has received a full Equals curriculum K-12. For the 18-19 school year: Because of the results of SANDI/FAST formative assessment, we will focus on improving more rigorous instruction for students based on the SANDI assessment. We will focus on students participating in more rigorous items on the SANDI assessment in ELA and Math. Professional Development for the 18-19 school year will focus on collaborative inquiry, and protocols examining student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, students in alternate assessment will demonstrate a 2 point increase over baseline skills in ELA and Math, a 3% increase, as evidenced by data collected on the appropriate formative assessment (SANDI). 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All 9/18 Population addressed: students with multiple disabilities and cognitive delays (12:1:4 and 12:1:1 class ratios) and students with autism (6:1:1, 8:1:1, 9:1:3 class ratios) classroom 9/18-11/2018 teachers, 9/18-11/2018 cluster ● Specific selection of items chosen for data collection from each content area. teachers 9/18-10/2019 ● Baseline data collected on SANDI/FAST-3X during school year.   SMILE, , First Author, Edmark, Equals Implementation of a Functional Academics program for 12:1:4 population. ● Utilization of E-Book technology on SMART BOARD to implement literacy program ● Utilization of switch adapted E-Books for student participation in reading program  Use of the following computer programs:  VIZZLE on  Use of IXL Math  Use of Board Maker Online  Use of Notebook  Use of Classroom Suite  Weebly Flipgrip  10/18, 3/19, 6/2019 9/18-6/2019 9/18-10/2018 baseline taken 9/18-6/2019 Monthly implementation according to curriculum themes. 9/18-6/2019 9/18-6/2019 Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, cluster teachers, administration, school based coach, Technology Education teachers, Speech Therapists 2018-19 CEP 18   Yogile photo program  Google Suite  iMovie ● Utilization of project based learning in classrooms to address the CCLS ● Using real world experience (community based programming) to address the CCLS math skills ● Use of small group and individual groupings during classroom lessons for differentiated learning ● Use of routines to integrate ELA and math skills into daily classroom activities  `SANDI/FAST midpoint evaluation  Integrating ELL strategies into reading, writing and listening activities  Number of satisfactory (Developing, Effective, Highly Effective) lessons observed in which there is alignment to CCLS (Literacy/Math) Professional Development to support Rigorous instruction: Showcase preparation SANDI Lesson Planning   Prompting (Response)  Prompting (Stimulus   PLC  Data Training  Data Analysis  Curriculum/Resource Fair  Inquiry Team Presentations Principal, Assistant Principals 2/2019 1/2019 6/2019 2/2019 10/18-6/2019 10/30-10/31/2018 11/20-11/21/2018 12/4-12-5,1/22-1/23/2018 12/11-12/12/2018 12/18-12-19/2018 6/4-6/5/2019 6/18-6/19 Monthly Monday PD 9/18-9/19/2018 2018-19 CEP 19  . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Video conferencing at monthly IEP meetings demonstrating strategies for home, parent visits to observe child’s programming throughout 18-19 school year. There will be family engagement workshops Mar. 2019-June, 2019, through Title III to demonstrate through workshops in communicative/vocational strategies, that parents can implement in the home, sending home communicative, reading materials for use at home as homework weekly. Responsible staff: Administrators, classroom teachers, ELL teachers, cluster teachers, department teams. Video conferencing will take place at Title III meetings and family engagement workshops. dates of meeting are: Saturday, November 17, 2018, Saturday, December 1,2018, Saturday, January 26, 2019, Saturday, February 9,2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Purchase of “Unique Learning System” to use their Transition Passport system as a curriculum guide for 44 teachers. STEM and Equals for all classes (K-12 ), First Author for 43 classrooms.   Eden curriculum for classes with students with autism (12 classes) .  Curriculum materials: Unique Learning Curriculum, SANDI/FAST Assessment, Grow to Learn grant. Arts for ELL grant, Donors Choose grants for materials, ELA and Math are integrated into NY Rising grant after school program, C.H.A.M.P.S.  Per session staff for CHAMPS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. SANDI/FAST interim data collected 2/19- Students will show 1.5% increase in students show a 1 point average growth increase over baseline in ELA and Math as evidenced by data collected on the appropriate formative assessment (SANDI) and student self- assessment on STAR Rubric. comparison of final data, 5/19. Number of students showing an increase of 1 average point of scores in Math, ELA .   Baseline collected on SANDI-Nov, 2018  SANDI/FAST end Term data: June, 2019-Collect and compare SANDI/FAST 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI/FAST-Nov. 2018, March, 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As of June, 2018  All Vocational Assessment 1 has been completed on all students 12 years and older (284 students)  43 classes are utilizing the Unique Curriculum for Vocational skills  Vocational logos have been completed and shared for 19 classes in the main site.  Prompting and Task analysis training has been completed for all staff on 10/30/17, 10/31/17, 1/8/18, 1/9/18.  Vocational preference assessments have been completed for all 12:1:1, 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 classes and a new assessment has been designed for 12:1:4 classes.  Monthly task analysis data has been collected and analyzed by all classes.  Vocational Assessment in SANDI has been completed for all alternate assessment students. (378)  We engaged 5 families through the PROMISE Grant over 5 weekends in October/November. They were 10/14, 10/21, 10/28, 11/4 and 11/18.  We had a holiday party for PROMISE on 12/9 that 3 families attended.  We had Saturday program on 4/14, 4/28, 5/12 and 5/19 that 6 families attended. Inquiry Team formed to focus on community vocational skills for 12:1:4 population. Preference sheet created for this level of student. Meetings 2 Wednesdays a month from Oct. 2017-present. Baseline reveals that out of 16 students participating in the pilot program, for Item #11, 8 students scored 3 or less, while for Item# 71, 10 students scored 3 or less. Student Support Meetings/Workshops for 17-18 school year: QCDD Family Support Conference-10/27/17 P811Q Family Resource Fair-11/14/17 Spring Family Resource Fair Queens Event- 3/18-26% of participants were P811Q families ACCES-VR Transition Workshops-11/8/17, 11/22/17, 12/6/17, 11/28/17, 1/24/18. Guardianship- 15 parents 4/19/18 Adult Program Tours-10/12/17 ,10/20/17, 11/16/17, 11/17/17, 11/20/17,12/7/17, 12/8/17, 2/11/17, 1/2/18, 1/23/18- a total of 34 parents attended these workshops. As of June, 2018, all students (alternate assessment) 12 years old or older (220 students), 37% were participating in authentic jobs in the community, and 92% in school and classroom (28% increase). 100% of alternate assessment 2018-19 CEP 22  students are participating in either community, school or classroom jobs. Additional school wide authentic jobs have been created including charging and dissemination of I-PADS, charging and replacing batteries in augmentative devices and a Graphics Design and Greeting Cards Work-shop, and shredding paper for use in an animal shelter. Students run a cafe program in the building. Each classroom has a vocational focus or "business" with a vocational logo. Baseline assessment was done utilizing the SANDI assessment and authentic jobs were based on skills from the SANDI/FAST and Level I Vocational Assessment. Task analysis data collection sheets have been completed for vocational tasks by utilizing self-assessment forms from Unique Learning System, or teacher made student self-assessment. As of June 2018, 3 students have been travel trained to work sites and home. Taco Bell, Oakland Lake and Movie World. 37% of all middle and high school students work in the community. P811Q has partnered with 50 community agencies. As of June, 2018. Graduation transition data reveals that out of 35 graduates, 80% have been accepted into post-secondary placement, 20% have applications pending for agency placement, 7 students (20% of graduates) are attending College (5 in two-year college, 2 in four-year, (an increase of 82%), and 11(31%) are placed in competitive employment including competitive job, vocational training programs, an increase of 63% from last year, 9% blended programs and 40% in Day Habilitation, ( a decrease of 63%) 3% in Day Health Care, 6% in Home Services, 20% pending trial in placement setting. (All are expected to be accepted). The 11 students who will be placed at Good Will Services for employment are now working 2 hours per day and receiving a salary. Some of the future employment sites are Starbucks. Hunter College, and Burlington. We have increased ACCESS-VR referrals to 7 which is our highest number to date. A Professional Learning Community was formed by teachers of 12:1:4 classes to determine vocational preferences of students who find it challenging to communicate vocational preferences. An adapted student preference sheet was designed and 2 items from SANDI/FAST were used to determine mastery of this goal. #11. Expresses interest /enjoyment/preference for specific items/activities by choosing an item/activity in a field of 2 choices (visual and verbal) during 3 different recesses/breaks. #71. Stays on task for 5 minutes to complete familiar age-appropriate vocational tasks (e.g., sorting 10 objects in 2 groups, packaging 2 items each into 5 bags, assembling 5 two-part items, etc.). Baseline taken on these assessed items revealed: #11-0%-0 0%-1 21%-2 21%-3 57%-4 #71- 7%-0 21%-1 50%-2 21%-3 0%-4 Data taken in June 2018 reveals: 21% showed improvement in Item#11 2018-19 CEP 23  79% showed an increase in Item# 71 SANDI data reveals that 15% of all students assessed for Transition Employment reached the goal of 5 point increase in skills in Transition Employment Skills. We will continue this goal in increasing Transition Employment skills by focusing on Student preference, self assessment and time on task. As of June, 2018, because of this data, we have done a highly effective job of adding appropriate and diversified work sites to our school, and designing task analysis for jobs, we want to focus on designing preference assessments for our students to express their preferred work experience. We also want to design appropriate assessment sheets . Our goal is to improve our transition outcomes in the community and school work sites, so that students have mastered specific job skills when they graduate. We will focus on students using the self assessment and job preference to determine appropriate job placement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment: By June 2019, through implementation of preference sheets and self assessment as a method of training and placement, students will demonstrate improvement in job skills by 20% by a 3 point average increase of skills in SANDI interim assessment. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Classsroom and Cluster and ENL teachers  Population addressed: Students aged 14-18, with emphasis on graduating students, with autism (6:1:1/8:1:1) and students with cognitive disabilities (12:1:1) and students with multiple disabilities (12:1:4) participating in school and community work Teachers, students participating in community work sites. ● Participate in the PROMISE Transition Services Grant which targets students 14-16 years old who receive Social Security Income benefits and will receive enhanced Transition Services.(Pillar 4) -Re-engaging families into Grant -SANDI/FAST Midpoint Assessment -Spring Saturday Program ● Students will be participating in the Unique Learning Curriculum which provides vocational lessons based on a Transitional monthly theme. Each lesson contains adapted materials such as job charts, job preference charts and student self-evaluations on the job. ● Students will utilize appropriate communication devices with messages necessary to perform the specific job. This includes I-Pads, electronic voice output devices, PECS, and manual communication boards.  Each student will follow a task analysis to perform their job and will be assessed at each step for decreased prompting. Administer and review Level 1 Vocational Assessment and SANDI  Differentiated self-assessments will be designed for students to use for job sites. Students, teachers participating in community and in-house vocational program 9/18-6/19 2/19 9/18 9/16, 23, 30, 10/14,21,28, 11/4, 11/18, 11/25,12/2, 12/9,12/16, 12/23, 12/29 2/19 4/19-6/19 2018-19 CEP 25  Differentiated preference sheets will be designed to 9/18-6/19 determine the student's voice in job selection. 9/18-6/19 Teachers, students participating in community work 9/18-6/19 10/18-6/19 9/18-5/19 9/18-10/18 District Transition Coach, School Transition Coach, teachers, paraprofessionals, 9/18-11/18 ENL teachers 9/18-10/18 1/19-5/19 10/18-6/19 10/18-6/19 Monthly, 10/18-6/19 ● Vocational development assessment ● Assign students to community/school work programs (ongoing)  Write appropriate task analysis for jobs in the community/ and in-school jobs. ● Design and implement a data collection sheet and collect baseline data  Implement Inquiry Teams based on vocational needs ● Review data ● Students complete job inventory preference form to determine job site assignments  Professional Development for Supportive Environment:  Vocational/Logos-Classroom Goals  Task Analysis Teachers, students Teachers, Administrators 2018-19 CEP 26  Designing preference Sheets  Differentiated self assessments  Vocational Preference Assessment-Differentiated between ages of 14-16 10/23-10/24  Assess and train students to use travel training skills to access work sites in the community Students in travel training program 10/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 District 75 travel training 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sending home sample task analysis for at-home homework practice weekly, parents view videos of student performing tasks in work site environment, Person Centered Planning meetings held monthly with parents to design a plan for present and future work experience, parent involvement in helping students indicate work preferences, Vocational 1 and 2 assessments done with parent interview, Sept. 2018. Parent Engagement workshops twice a year. (September, 2018, May, 2019.) Responsible staff include: Administrators, teachers, cluster teachers, job coach, guidance counselor, ENL teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax levy budget will be used to purchase materials for student jobs including brooms, rakes, cleaning materials. District 75 IndTech provides adapted materials for job sites. Community businesses collaborate with us and provide field work experiences for our students.  ACCESS-VR provides stipends for our working students. The school Transition Linkage Coordinator and job developer network with community businesses to provide job placement for students. Staff members, including classroom teachers and paraprofessionals have been instrumental in finding authentic work in the community for our students with the most significant disabilities.  The District 75 speech department provides communication boards for use at work sites.  We have been recipients of a $41,000 grant from PROMISE Grant to provide more employment opportunities to students between 14-16 years old. Councilman Bronstein has been a great support an resource in helping our school to partner with community businesses.  The DOE has again provided funds for P811Q to participate in the SANDI/FAST Assessment program. It has a vocational component. The school employs a Transition Linkage Coordinator/Job Developer and District 75 Transition Coach. Instructional resources include Unique Learning System, Equals Math, First Author, SMILE Reading.   Per-session inquiry groups to implement vocational assessments and curriculum once a month meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 27  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.   SANDI/Fast midpoint assessment, 4/19 revealing a 1.5 point increase (50%) in vocational skills on SANDI/FAST. Sept.2018 -During Inquiry meetings, teachers will decide on assessments to implement for vocational program including Levels 1, 2, and 3 Vocational Assessments and Task Analysis. SANDI will be administered during fall, 2018 and spring, 2019.   Measurable Post-Secondary IEP Goals will be reviewed 2 times per year Feb. 2019, May, 2019. Students and their parents will participate in Person Centered Planning meetings to review their vocational preferences and placement. This way, parents can learn more about their child’s career education. (Pillar 3 and Trust) Students’ job inventory preference forms will be collected and analyzed to evaluate program effectiveness materials will be used to design Units of Study and Scope and Sequence for the school year.   Data on student self-assessments will be collected and analyzed monthly 9/18-6/19.  SANDI/FAST end term results indicating a 3 point increase in Vocational Skills on SANDI/FAST Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SANDI/FAST-October 2018 and June 2019 and 4/19 midpoint Task Analysis data collected-Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Collaborative Inquiry Teams ran in 2 off sites and in main site and met weekly to discuss, analyze and    design instruction in First Author First Author Pre-Assessments (Writing Measures Assessment Tool) has been given to students in classes, The STAR Rubric is also used to assess writing samples. First Author lessons have been implemented in 5 classrooms and have been formally and informally observed. IEP goals for Writing have been written for 22 students participating in the First Author program based on SANDI assessment and First Author Assessment (Writing Measures Assessment Tools)  Weekly Collaborative Department Meetings addressed curricular issues related to writing  As of June, 2018, data on the First Author Program reveals: 41 students participated in First Author Writing Program and pre-assessment and post-assessment. 22 students had writing goals on their IEP based on First Author skills. Because of the ongoing collaborative learning groups, 100% of the students showed improvement on the post assessment of skills. This surpassed our goal of 80%, therefore this goal was attained. As a result of data from the collaborative team on First Author, next year's focus will be for each department to form an Inquiry team that addresses the school focus of vocational programming. We will take a closer look at how we can better assess students' vocational preferences by designing a differentiated preference sheet that meets the needs of each of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teams : 2018-19 CEP 29  By June, 2019 through the implementation of strategies from collaborative inquiry teams, students will demonstrate a 2% increase in job preference skills and time on task skills (increase from one level of independence to the next level) in SANDI vocational interim assessment 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Design appropriate vocational preference assessment for student in 6:1:1, 12:1:4, 12:1:1.  Design data collection sheet for vocational preference and time on task during vocational activities. ● Teachers will form Collaborative Professional Development Communities teams to address use of vocational assessments for increase time on task in vocational activities. Teams will meet on a weekly basis Population addressed: high school aged students with autism(6:1:1/8:1:1) and students with cognitive disabilities (12:1:1) 9/18-10/18 9/18-10/19 9/18-10/18 9/18-6/19- one day per week Teachers, Administrators, Related Service Providers, Paraprofessionals, School Coach, ENL teachers  Teams will decide on SANDI items that will be used to assess increase in job preference, time on task and self assessment. ● Collaborative teams will research and discuss strategies to implementing time on task in vocational tasks. ● Teachers will collaborate with their colleagues to help implement lessons in the classrooms. ● Teachers will provide PD and support to each other through Inquiry team work. ● Recognize the talents and expertise of our teachers. (Pillar 2) ● Encourage teachers to learn from one another and assist each other with appropriate lessons.(Pillar 2) Professional Development to support collaboration: -Team building -Data Collection 9/18-6/19 Teachers participating in First Author 9/11-12,2/12-13,6/25-6/26 Administrators, Lead teachers 2018-19 CEP 31  -Self-assessment strategies -Student Friendly Goal training -Universal language, Student Needs -Problem of Practice Inquiry Team -Inquiry team Presentations -Common Planning  Assess students with Preference Assessment Tool, pre and post- test. Link IEP goals with SANDI Vocational Assessment SANDI/FAST midpoint assessment   9/25-9/26 3/12-3/13 4/16-4/17 4/23-4/24 10/18 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Psychologists, Behavior Specialists 9/18-6/19 as per annual reviews weekly, 10/19-6/19 2/19 ● All P811Q teachers form strong teams to analyze student assessment results. Teachers 9/18-6/19 Teachers, administrators ● Teacher teams make proposals to administrators for inquiry work. They are responsible to keep minutes, attendance sheets, next-steps. Admin does “pulse checks” to ensure protocol is followed & advancement made. ● Proposal form created for teams to use for inquiry work. Teams provide copies of agendas, minutes, attendance & next steps to admin for review. ● Weekly Collaborative Department Meetings to address curricular issues related to writing. ● Inquiry teams using a model of distributive leadership in which all teams rotate roles. 2018-19 CEP 32  Post job postings for teacher facilitator, interview and choose leader. ● Utilize a collaborative process for addressing issues for our most academically challenged students. ● Provide common planning time through department meetings and extended day PD. weekly9/18-6/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to participate in lessons that are sent home. The teacher “brainstorms” with the parents about interests for their child. Title 3 program invites parents in for participatory vocational/communication workshops done with their child to learn how to implement students' vocational skills in the home. Responsible staff includes: Classroom teachers, ENL staff. Video conferencing will take place at 4 meetings set up with Title 3 Parent Engagement funds. Dates of meeting are: Saturday, November 17, 2018, Saturday, December 1,2018, Saturday, January 26, 2019, Saturday, February 9,2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Student voice in the form of a Student Council, Club Formations. 2. Create inquiry teams with a focus on Vocational preference and time on task.. 3. Complete vocational preference assessment. 4. Inquiry Collaborative teams meet on a consistent basis, hand in proposals, keep data on work, review data and present results of collaboration with colleagues Instructional resources include Unique Learning Curriculum Passport Learning Transition. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  SANDI/FAST Midpoint Benchmark- Feb. 2019, students will demonstrate a 1% increase in job preference/time on task skills. ● Completed pre- assessment of vocational preference skills in First Author. Sept-Oct., 2018. ● Implementation of Vocational/Communication lessons in classrooms. Sept.2017-June2018. ● Daily data collection 9/18-6/19- collected and analyzed Nov. 2018, January, 2019, April, 2019, June, 2019. ● Mastery of Vocational IEP goals by June, 2019. ` Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IEP Goals related to vocational tasks.. Reviewed Nov.2018, Feb, 2019, Apr.2019, June, 2019. SANDI pre and post assessment of vocational skills, Sept. 2018, June, 2019 Data collected monthly from Professional Learning Communities. Sept, 2018-June, 2019. Use of teacher differentiated self-assessments of student vocational skills (peer review, checklists) Sept. 2018-June, 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership: As of June, 2018 data from ADVANCE Teacher Tracker reveals:  63 teachers have completed initial planning conferences, and end of year conferences.  2% of teachers completed a Teacher Improvement Plan , a decrease of 67%  Attendance data for Sept 2017 started at 89 %, data reveals for June, 2018, attendance was up to 94%, an increase of 6% As of June, 2018, 289 formal and informal observations were conducted for 63 teachers. Our focus this past year was on the ADVANCE component 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction (obs.) The component was evaluated 229 times. 89% of the teachers achieved a rating of Effective or Highly Effective on this component. The prior year 89% received a E or HE rating. This reflects an 89% maintenance of "Effective" and Highly Effective" prompting us to observe that we have made enough progress on this goal to review a new Danielson component that is a concern. A review of data on Danielson Component 3d: "Using Assessment in Instruction" reveals that in 17-18 school year, only 14% of teachers received a highly effective rating on this component. As a result of this data, we will focus our Effective School Leadership goal and ADVANCE training using the Danielson Rubric 3d to provide PD for teachers on this component including assessment of student skills, self-assessment for students, and data collection and analysis.. Teachers will also form professional learning groups to study this component. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective School Leadership :BY June, 2019, there will be a 10% increase in “Effective" and "Highly Effective” ratings for the ADVANCE component ITEM # 3d: "Using Assessment in Instruction" as evidenced from Advance Score Tracker data. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Use of Danielson rubric to frame observations & actionable feedback.(Pillar 2) All Teachers rated on ADVANCE ● All teachers fill out Professional Growth Plans which are used for discussion/talking points during Initial Planning Conferences. (Pillar 2) ● Use of Unique pre & post-tests, SANDI/FAST-identify & flag IEP goals, use of Level I & Level II vocational assessments, CDOS, Equals pre- and post-assessment. ● Use of technology, computers, Smart Boards to address Designing Coherent Instruction techniques with students with disabilities. (Pillar 1)  Use of data collection as a means of assessment in the classroom. Principal. Assistant Principals, coach, lead teachers 9/18-5/19 9/18 9/18-6/19 ● Give actionable feedback to teachers on Danielson rubric during observations Principals, AP's Principal, AP's teachers Review focus components of this year’s Danielson, Looking at 8 components for evaluation Review ADVANCE midpoint assessment Form a teacher collaborative team that looks at how using "assessment in instruction" looks for the student with severe cognitive challenges with a finished product guide (Pillar 3) Department meetings held on weekly basis that addresses this component and its implementation 10/18-5/19 2/19 9/18 Formation of Teacher collaborative inquiry teams to research the components implementation in the classroom 9/18-9/19 2018-19 CEP 36 Professional Development to support Effective School Leadership: Principal, AP's, teachers -Encounter Attendance, Website use -Professional Learning Community focus -SANDI/FAST Leveling/Assessment -Problem of Practice inquiry Team ● Collect mid-year data on ADVANCE component. Assistant Principal 9/18-6/19 9/18-9/19 weekly, 9/18-6/19 10/2/18, 10/3/18 3/26-/193/27/19 2/19 Principal. Assistant Principals, coach, lead teachers Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year Sept. 18-19, the homework assignments will reflect the focus of Using Assessment in Instruction , Component 3d, Danielson. Students will be given daily homework assignments that reflect their assessment needs and IEP goals. Homework will focus on current instruction in the classroom. On parent teacher conference nights (Nov. 2018, March, 2019), and during IEP conferences, parents will be informed of their child’s assessment results. Responsible staff: Classroom teachers, Related Service Providers, ENL teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, , School Collaborative Inquiry teams. Grow to Learn grant, parent participation, Arts for ELLs grant, HAP grant for STEM IOBY grant, Disney NYC grant. (Pillar 1) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint benchmark: By Feb. 2019, a review of mid-year ratings on component #3d after teacher observations should reveal a minimum of 5% increase of "highly effective " ratings. 2018-19 CEP 37  Review of ADVANCE Tracking Data- 6/19 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year ADVANCE evaluation reports-2/19 ADVANCE Tracking Data-6/19 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June, 2018, Title III data reveals:  96 ENL, NYSESLAT students are eligible for Title III participation in P811Q  Program was conducted from 10/17-3/18 through Immigration Fund and LEP  11 augmentative devices given out to students in the program  Through Title III we had 3 workshops in September attended by 8 parents, 5 home visits, and two professional development meetings attended by 18 staff.  To assess student skills, we surveyed parents and asked them what visual strategies they feel would help them at home and teach them apps that will help. We have still been using Vizzle with collection of data. Baseline has been done on 5 students so far.  Visual strategies use of technology, creating boards through Vizzle, survey  PDs for staff were on Jan 10th and 11th, 2018 attended by 18 staff  1 staff visited 2 ENL students for home visits on 1/31/18  1 staff went to 2 ENL students’ houses on 1/23/18 and 1 student on 1/18/18  1 staff will visit 1 ENL student on 3/1/18  11 AAC devices(GO Talks) have been purchased for use with ENL students in class lessons and use of Title III grant to train parents on use of technology in the home and community  Universal Language for Crisis PD presented-9/25,9/26  Phone Blast to communicate with patents is used 2 times per month and Class DOJO is used by teachers since 9/1 Data on school parent engagement as of June 2018 indicates:  36 moments shared on Class Story  2663 conversations via Messaging  8 posts translated  1041 parent views of updates  235 parent likes on posts shared  Family Engagement Night-9/27/17- 68 parents attended, 5/24/18-28 parents attended ( a 7% increase from last year's total attendance) Spring (2018) Parent/Teacher conference- 129 parents attended, Fall (2017)- Parent/teacher Conferences-187 parents   Number of parents who visited Parent Coordinator from 12/17-present-56  Number of parents attending 7 workshops given for parents through Parent Coordinator- 105 parents ( a 40% increase of attendance from last year) Spring Family Resource Fair-attended by 104 parents (452% increase in parent attendance from last year)  2018-19 CEP 39  Strong Family Community Ties: The alternate assessment non-verbal communicators of P 811Q need alternative means to communicate (AAC devices) in order to fully function in our society. All students who need AAC devices have access to them (Pillar 1) during the school day. The school determined that the I-Pad device was an age-appropriate, socially acceptable means to communicate at school and in the community. Data from June, 2018 indicates that 29 students are now using the I-PAD as a form of communication at home and in school. This is a 93% increase from our core group of 15 students. Three students moved up from less restrictive, higher level voice output devices. Data on Sandi item ADL # 37 - "Identifies 3 areas of interest when asked, "What do you like to do?"- reveals that 63% of students demonstrated at least a one step less restrictive prompting in SANDI assessment. Since we met our goal of increased parent attendance at workshops for ADL skills/communication, this goal has been attained.Since this goal was successfully met, our focus during the 18-19 school year will be to better engage parents by increasing student vocational skills in school, home, work site, community. Parents will be engaged to work on vocational skills with their child at the school and at home in order to increase vocational skills such as communicating, social skills, self-care, problem solving, leisure, work skills and functional academics. (Pillar 3) Homework will be looked at more closely as a link from home to school. Parents will attend Saturday programs through Title III. Parents will engage in video conferencing and attend a variety of Transition Workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  Strong Family Community Ties: By June 2019, as a result of family engagement sessions with vocational/Communication training, there will be a 10% increase in parent involvement with a 2 point increase in mastery of students' vocational/communication skills as evidenced by use of SANDI/FAST formative assessment. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Use of one SANDI item for comparison and assessment.(language, communication).  organize Vocational activities for students and parents to do together using English as a Native Language Strategies: TPR, Natural Approach and Language Experience Approach.  The activities will include vocational skills with a communicative focus: Cooking with a Chef Shredding Paper to deliver to .... Making dog biscuits to bring to ..... Learning about our Community and Countries we come from - tied with cooking with chef  invite agencies to speak w parents about transition, OPWW. Choice of a SANDI item Communication # 37 as assessment of skills  increased parent attendance at vocational/communication workshops  Parent training on specific vocational/communication skills that can be done in the home including communication, behavior skills, work skills. ● Students receive an I-PAD as a communication device that contained a software program called “ProLoquo2Go”. This program utilizes Mayer-Johnson symbols which students activate on the screen to communicate. Teachers will update program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Asst. Principal, Bilingual Coach, bilingual and ESL teachers and paraprofessionals. Family Worker, Speech Therapists Asst. Principal, Bilingual Coach, bilingual and ESL teachers and paraprofessionals. Family Worker, Speech Therapists Students with multiple disabilities and severe cognitive delays (12:1:4), students with developmental delays (12:1:1) and students with autism (6:1:1/8:1:1), non-verbal, all of whom participate in NYSAA. 9/18-6/19 3/19-6/19 10/18-6/19 10/16, 5/17 9/17-6/18 2/18 Parents and Family Members weekly,9/18-6/19 10/18 and 5/19 3/18-6/18 9/18-6/19 2018-19 CEP 41  Parent Training on the use of I-pads & ProLoquo2Go Program for use in home and community.  Parent attendance at workshops for Transition, Speech/Communication/Title III/Literacy through use of video conferencing  Parent Engagement meetings  Use of 811Q website to engage parents  SANDI/FAST midpoint assessment of Vocational/Communication skills  Emphasis on homework as a link to families and student achievement and generalization in Communication and ELA.  Use of VIZZLE for home implementation after parent attendance at school workshops.  Continued use of Phone Blast to improve communication ● Classroom teachers will continue to participate in professional development presented by our Speech Therapists to better utilize I-Pads and Voice output devices in vocational settings. ● Speech Therapists will also push in the classroom and work individually with students to increase their recognition of symbols. There will also be small I-Pad training groups facilitated by Speech Therapists. ● Classroom teachers will increase the rigor of using the I-PAD, and Voice output devices by continually updating the program and giving students higher level work. Data will be taken on students’ progress on being able to reduce the amount of prompts needed to give a communicative response. ● Baseline data on vocational/communication skills completed from 11/17. ● Professional Development to support Strong Family and Community ties -I-PAD in classroom lessons, behavior training, task analysis, problem solving skills, collection of and analysis of data monthly. 10/18 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 11/18 Students with multiple disabilities and severe cognitive delays (12:1:4), students with developmental delays (12:1:1) and students with autism (6:1:1/8:1:1), non-verbal, all of whom participate in NYSAA. Students with multiple disabilities and severe cognitive delays (12:1:4), students with developmental delays (12:1:1) and students Asst. Principal, Bilingual Coach, bilingual and ESL teachers and paraprofessionals. Family Worker, Speech Therapists Asst. Principal, Bilingual Coach, bilingual and ESL teachers and paraprofessionals. Family Worker, Speech Therapists 2018-19 CEP 42  ● Review and graph data ● Evidence of lesson plans utilizing I-Pad technology – 1/18, 3/18, 6/18 ● Appropriate lesson plans written to address vocational/communication skills reviewed weekly ● Formation of A Professional Learning Community Inquiry focusing on Vocation/Communication and how to increase student outcome through parental involvement. ● Provide in school and at-home training for parents on use of device in the home and community. ● Use of JARs strategies, task analysis for home routines.  Use of Title III grant to train parents on use of technology in the home and community.  Visits to students in the community to demonstrate use of device in the home, adaptive living skills analysis.  Use of School Messenger software to communicate with parents through text messages. with autism (6:1:1/8:1:1), Asst. Principal, Bilingual Coach, bilingual and ESL teachers and paraprofessionals. Family Worker, Speech Therapists 2/19, 5/19 1/19-6/19 9/18 1/19-6/19 Students with multiple disabilities and severe cognitive delays (12:1:4), students with developmental delays (12:1:1) and students with autism (6:1:1/8:1:1), -Parents 3/19-6/19 9/19-6/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Through our Title III affiliation, staff will make home visits to help parents carry out adaptive living task analysis at home. We partner with 42 agencies that provide parent support, home visits, workshops and parent fairs. Responsible staff: Transition Coordinator, Job Developer, agencies. Workshops will be provided at school sites on vocational/communication for the home and community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teams, including teacher, paraprofessionals, related service, administrator, School Collaborative Inquiry Team, school coach, cluster teachers, parents of students using communication devices and Title III grant and RESO-A grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Students will be evaluated on their vocational/ communication skills progress utilizing SANDI/FAST midpoint assessment, 2/18, revealing a 1 point increase in skills. ● Vocational and Communication Skills and IEP Annual Goals will be assessed for mastery four times per year, Nov.2018, Feb, 2019, April, 2019, June, 2019. Data will be collected daily and graphed at the end of the year to indicate progress. Teachers will complete evaluations and will recommend students for participation in project. 9/18-6/19 ● Classroom teachers and Speech Teachers will decide on appropriate SANDI Assessment item number to utilize this year, 11/18  Parent sign-in sheets for workshops-monthly 9/18-6/19  Number of students participating in Title III- 3/18-6/18  Review of SANDI data baseline and end of year-11/18 and 6/19  Monthly review of data from using teacher created data form. 9/18-6/19 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SANDI- Nov.2018. Mar.2019, June 2019   Parent Sign-in sheets-monthly  Teacher created data collection form,weekly  District 75 Communication Profile-September 2018 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who scored Level 1 or 2 in ELAand Math assessments and students who are held over from their grade. Students who scored Level 1 or 2 inELAand Math assessments and students who are held over from their grade. Students who scored Level 1 or 2 inELAand Math assessments and students who are held over from their grade Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups Small groups During the school day During the school day Small groups Small groups During the school day During the school day Small groups During the school day Teachers College Resource Library: Professional Resources with instructional strategies to help improve student learning Test Preparation using Ready New York program. Test Preparation using Ready New York program. Go Math/Everyday Math games: Drill Exercise to build fact and operational skills as well as calculator skills, logic, money exchange skills, geometry and spatial sense Graphic Organizers and Symbols (Boardmaker): to connect reading to writing 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who scored Level 1 or 2 inELAand Math assessments and students who are held over from their grade Students in Tier 2 with at-risk behaviors and Tier 3 with high risk behaviors News-2-You: A leveled online newspaper utilizing picture symbols and words to address social studies lessons Social Stories: small narratives created to help students to better understand social-emotional issues Small groups During the school day Small groups and one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47 The students will receive counseling services on a consistent basis at the school. Students will receive basic school supplies such as backpacks, notebooks, folders, pencils, pencil cases. Students that have behavioral challenges, they will receive crisis intervention and behavioral plans will be implemented with them. Students' families receive a basket of food for Thanksgiving and Christmas. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $7806 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 50  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. Q811, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. Q811 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. Q 811, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 54  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 55  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 57  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P811Q’s 2018-19 Title III program will focus on building functional English language skills through technology. Instruction will be provided by three certified ENL teachers. An assistant principal will oversee the Title III program; four paraprofessionals, who speak either Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Bengali or Haitian Creole, will participate in the program. It is necessary to have paraprofessionals from diverse language backgrounds to participate in the Title III program to enable our students and their families to access the Title III program. Research shows that families want to partner with professionals for knowledge and support for the use of technology at home and in the community (Y, Saito and Turnbull). The Title III Supplemental Program for ELLS, entitled, "Access through Technology: Enhancing Literacy for English Language Learners" will serve up to 45 ELLs. There will be 28 students serviced throughout the four Saturday programs and 17 will get instruction through home visit students equaling 45 ELLs receiving instructional sessions. To be able to service 28 students we will be asking that each student attend one of the four Saturday sessions with their parents/guardians. The instructional groups will be set up in either groups of six, eight or twelve students, however, in order to create our group we will schedule the sessions to have no more than 14 students (divided into their classroom ratios – either a 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 will meet on a Saturday, or a group of 12:1:1 or a 12:1:4 group) to allow staff to be able to work with families and in order to respect the students’ IEP mandates. Sessions will take place at 811Q on four Saturday mornings between January and June. During sessions, the Title III instructional team will instruct students and families on the monthly Unique theme. We will use Vizzle, Flipgrid, and visual supports created by Boardmaker to enhance the Unique curriculum. Vizzle and Flipgrid allow students with significant disabilities to engage in activities aligned with the themes of The Unique Learning System. Parents will be asked to bring their laptops or Ipads, if they have one, to the trainings, so that these programs can be installed on them. Families who do not have portable devices will be able to use one at the center-based sessions and will be instructed on how to install the player on their home computers or tablets. They may also request a home visit for assistance with installation and use of the VIZZLE student player or Flipgrid. Wherever instruction takes place, assistance will be provided to families by an ENL teacher and bilingual paraprofessionals as they are taught how to engage their children in activities specially designed for them. The language of instruction will be English, with the bilingual paraprofessionals offering instructional support to students and parents and serving as interpreters as necessary. Training for students will consist of instruction in the use of VIZZLE and/or Flipgrid in the context of lessons aligned to the Unique Learning System's current theme. Family members will observe the process and learn how to use VIZZLE and/or Flipgrid to assist their children in completing assignments. Emphasis will be on using technology to access the Unique Curriculum in order to enhance literacy across the content areas for English Language Learners with significant intellectual and communication disabilities and to improve overall levels of independent functioning and appropriate behavior through the use of schedules and other visual supports. Students will use laptops or tablets to engage in specially designed work related to the lesson, using Flipgrid and/or the Vizzle student player installed on their devices. Families will 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information be shown how they can use Vizzle and Flipgrid to assist their children in completing assignments and will be taught to use of other visual supports, such as behavior contracts, schedules, and social stories to improve independent functioning and behavior. Sample activities will be given to parents for them to do at home with their children, and opportunities for further assistance will be described. Instruction will take place in one of P811Q multi-media labs, classrooms, or a public venue in the students’ community designated by the school, from 9 a.m. to 12 p.m. on four Saturday mornings or evenings after school between January 2019 and June 2019. Sessions will be scheduled in order for each grade band (K-2, 3-5, 6-9 and 10-12) in a ratio group to be served at P811Q (6:1:1, 8:1:1. 12:1:1 and 12:1:4) on the selected Saturdays. One will be for elementary students and one will be for high school students. The students will be grouped in either groups of twelve, six, or eight students (1 teacher and up to 4 paraprofessionals, as required by the ratio), in order to respect the IEP class ratios of all the students. Students, along with family members, will be instructed by three ENL teachers. Due to the severe physical disabilities faced by some P811Q students, 17 students may be seen during home visits of 2 hours each by a certified ENL teacher and a bilingual paraprofessional on a Saturdays morning from 10:00 am to 12:00 pm or after-school on week-days on dates when center-based trainings are not scheduled. The purpose of the home visit is: 1) to train parents in the use of visual supports, such as schedules, behavior contracts, and social stories, etc. and 2) to install the VIZZLE student player or the Flipgrid video platform, on the home computer or tablet and instruct parents in using it. Parents will not only be exposed to the curriculum but will also be able to learn to use all of the technology. The 3 ENL teachers will also provide home visits to the students they are servicing, lasting 2 hours between 10 am and 12 pm on a Saturday morning when no school-based sessions have been scheduled or on a weekday evening between 5:00 pm and 7:00 pm upon demand. Should a school-based session include students from mixed student-to-staff ratios, the group size will be capped at the smallest ratio present in the age range, and the staffing mandates for that ratio will be met (1 teacher and up to 4 paraprofessionals, as required by the ratio). The instructional groups will be set up to be led by an ENL teacher. Each Saturday there will be 2 ENL teachers working with each group of six, eight or no more than 12 students per session and will vary depending on the availability of the families. The 28 students in the program will attend one of the four Saturday sessions with their parents/guardians. Instruction will focus on using visual supports in school, at home, and in the community to build communicative competence, and on using VIZZLE and Flipgrid for our students with severe language disabilities, to access the curriculum and complete assignments through the use of visuals. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Two 3-hour training sessions will be facilitated by three ENL teachers who have been trained by MonarchTT. These professional development sessions will take place after school in a P811Q computer lab or classroom from 2:30 pm to 5:30 pm on a weekday afternoon in January 2019 for a total of 6 hours prior to the commencement of the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part C: Professional Development The first session will review the basics of navigating Vizzle, using the Vizzle library and creating visual supports. The second session will introduce participants to the Flipgrid video platform, a video response tool that will help students who are verbal to improve their overall communication skills. A representative from Flipgrid will participate in the meeting via video conferencing, free of charge, in order to answer questions from the staff. Monolingual teachers and paraprofessionals with ELLs in their classes will be invited to attend and will be paid from another budget. All three ENL teachers and four paraprofessionals serving in the Title III program will attend the 3-hr. session, of both the Vizzle or Flipgrid sessions. Teachers and paraprofessionals will learn to use Vizzle and Flipgrid to design differentiated lessons and activities aligned to the CCLS and the Unique Learning System’s units of study. Paraprofessionals will also learn how to assist students in using the applications to complete extension activities and assignments. The bilingual/ENL teachers and paraprofessionals will be thus prepared to instruct ELLs and other students in their classes in using technology to engage in Unique Learning System-aligned activities, and they will be able create activities so that parents can assist their children in completing homework assignments through the Vizzle student player and Flipgrid. As a result of this professional development series, teachers, paraprofessionals, students, and families will have the skills necessary to provide or engage in challenging, motivating learning experiences aligned to the Common Core Standards in ELA across the content areas, following best practices in ENL strategies and methodology for ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs will be invited to attend presentations to learn about the Title III program. Two meetings will take place in January 2019, from 5:30 - 7:30 pm, one at P811Q main site an one at the P147 elementary off-site (or possibly our newest elementary site P37). The latter meeting will include families whose children attend the P822 and PS37 elementary off-sites located nearby. Each of the January parent meetings will be led by a P811Q ENL teacher. Up to four paraprofessionals who speak the parents' language (Spanish, Chinese, Bengali and Korean or Tagalog) will be available to serve as interpreters. If paraprofessionals speaking other languages are needed for interpretation, they will be paid through another budget. The supervisor of the Title III program, a P811Q assistant principal, will also be present at both meetings. Parents will be notified of the parent meetings by a flyer in their native language sent through their child's book-bag 10 days in advance of each meeting. Outreach to parents by telephone will be conducted by a bilingual paraprofessional during extended day times reserved for that purpose at no charge to the Title III budget. Parents will be made aware of the goals of the Title III program by the official Title III letter in their home la language and will be informed of events in their home language through school notices in their home language and through telephone outreach by a paraprofessional that speaks their language.At each meeting, the Title III coordinator will explain both the Title III Program and how Vizzle and Flipgrid are used with the Unique Learning System at P811Q for all alternate assessment students in Grades K-12, including ELLs. The teachers will demonstrate how homework assignments and extension 2018-19 CEP 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities activities are added to individual student folders in Vizzle and/or Flipgrid how progress is tracked. They will also present examples of visual supports and demonstrate their use to promote independent functioning and regulate behavior. At the meeting, parents will receive an overview of visual supports, see a demonstration of some of Vizzle and Flipgrid activities and see video examples of students using Vizzle and Flipgrid visual supports. Parents will be encouraged to sign up for the Saturday instructional workshop for students and families, or for a home visit, to further explore the use of Vizzle and Flipgrid and the application of visual supports to the individual needs of their children. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Total = $11,111.86 Direct Instruction: Saturday: $4253.54 Home visits: $3242.92 Parent Engagement: Jan. 2019 Mtg. 1 $739.72 Jan. 2019 Mtg. 2 $739.72 Professional Development: January 2019: $1,762.26 Support Staff: $373.70 2018-19 CEP 63 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Support Staff 1 Secretary x 10 hrs. x 37.37 = 373.70 Parent Engagement 1/2019 evening meetings for PS822, PS147, PS37: 1 Supervisor x 2.5 hrs x 63.45= 158.63 2 ENL teachers x 2.5hrs x 60.65 = 303.25 4 paraprofessi Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. onals x 2 hrs x 34.73 = 277.84 1/2019 evening meeting at main site: 1 Supervisor x 2.5hrs. x 63.45 = 253.80 2 ENL teachers x 2.5 hrs. x 60.65 = 303.25 4 paraprofessionals x 2 hrs x 34.73= 277.84 Professional Development: 1 Supervisor x 4 hours x 63.45 = 253.80 3 ENL teachers x 6 hrs x 60.65 = 1.091.70 4 paraprofessionals x 3 hrs. x 34.73 = 416.76 2018-19 CEP 64  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction (Saturday) 1 Supervisor x 4 sessions x 3.5 hrs. x 63.45 = 888.30 2 ENL teachers x 4 sessions x 3.5 hrs. x 60.65 = 1698.20 4 paraprofessionals x 4 sessions x 3 hrs x 34.73 = 1667.04 Direct Instruction ( Home Visits) 1 ENL teacher x 17 visits x 2 hrs x 60.65 = 2062.10 1 bilingual paraprofessional x 17 visits x 2 hrs x 34.73 = 1180.82 2018-19 CEP 65  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Purchased services n/a n/a n/a  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly 2018-19 CEP 66  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $1229 Travel Other n/a 25.14 TOTAL 12366. Renewal of 2 Vizzle subscriptions $500 x 2 = 1000.00 Boardmaker Online $99 x 1 = $99.00 Flipgrid subscriptions $65 x 2 = $130 n/a Refreshments for parent engagement and Saturday trainings 12366. 2018-19 CEP 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P.811Q-Marathon School Borough Queens School Number 811 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Penny Ryan Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Xiu-Cao Li/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Victoria Donofrio/ENL/Math Teacher/Subject Area Luis Montoro/Bilingual Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Michel Rueda Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Saine Arroyave Parent Coordinator Sasha Lopez Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 4 3 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 68  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 410 Total number of ELLs 97 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2007-2008 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 7 1 8 1 9 3 10 2 11 1 12 3 0 0 1 1 3 2 1 3 Tot # 11 0 0 0 0 0 11 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELLs at P811Q participated in the SANDI formative assessments for students who are alternately assessed. All the ELLs follow an Alternate Curriculum, including the inclusion students who also follow a modified alternate curriculum. Students' data was used to create appropriate groupings for ENL classes as well as differentiated instruction based on Levels of Performance in SANDI . Most of our ELL students were found to be in the Entering(Beginning) and Emerging/Transitioning (Intermediate) levels during the Spring, 2018 and Fall, 2018 SANDI assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Classroom teachers assess in SANDI formative assessments and share results with ENL teachers to group students for ENL classes during Monday Professional Development Period. 2018-19 CEP 69  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The Language Allocation Policy Team and School Leadership Team evaluate the success of the TBE, Free Standing and Self-contained ENL programs by periodically reviewing the students' performances on the NYSAA, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, SANDI, teacher assessments, observation of student acquired language skills in school and community settings, student portfolios, mastery of IEP goals and parental positive feedback. NYSESLAT levels and grade levels are used to determine the ENL schedules of Standalone and Integrated ENL. SANDI is the most appropriate assessment to use with our students in creating IEP goals and for ENL staff to identify ENL learning needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Classroom teachers and ENL teachers meet during Common Preps and Tuesday Afternoon (Extended Day) to address individual needs and provide individual students with additional supports throughout the school day. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Groups of TBE/ENL teachers meet during Department Meeting to analyze results of NYSAA/NYSESLAT/SANDI , data collection and other informal assessments to determine the type of instruction needed, strategies to be used, materials to be adapted with students scoring below proficiency level. These identified students receive RtI, those in Tier 3 receive Intense and Individualized Instruction, as well as extra attention,activities and experience targeted to specific students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. During the 2017-2018 97 K-12 ELLs participated in the Spring 2018 Administration of the NYSESLAT. We use the the levels scored in NYSESLAT (Beginning/Entering, Intermediate/Emerging, High Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced/Expanding, Proficient/Commanding Level) to group appropriately throughout our 8 sites. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All assessment scores are distributed for teachers to use as an additional assessment in planning instructional goals and IEP goals. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2 ENL instructional models are being followed: Integrated and Stand Alone. ELLs receive a combination of Intergrated and Stand Alone instruction based on self-contained classroom ratios (12:1:1,8:1:1,6:1:1,12:1:4) and 3 continuous grade level rules. Integrated Model/Ungraded: the ENL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with the regular self-contained classroom or cluster teacher and provides language acquisition and vocabulary support using ENL methodologies and instructional materials. Within the Integrated Model the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher in all content areas. Students have access to an array of both printed and technology materials. To ensure that students meet the standards, ENL instructions follow the NYS ENL Standards and incorporate ENL 2018-19 CEP 70  methodology such as Cooperative Learning, and Whole Language Approach. The ENL methodologies (e.g. Total Physical Response (TPR), the Natural Approach, Language Experience Approach and Whole Language) are used with students with severe disabilities. Students with autism make use of the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) and other visual systems that promote communication and social skills development. ELLs receive the number of units of ENL instruction as per CR Part 154. ELLs also receive content area instruction by certified special education teachers. Students in alternate placement receive support from alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak their native languages. Stand Alone Model/Ungraded: The ENL teacher takes the ENL students out of their classrooms to a separate location for ENL instruction based on classroom ratios. ELLs work intensively in a small group or individually on the targeted language skills and on cultural activities. Instruction is provided in language acquisition skills, vocabulary development, and content areas. ENL teachers plan carefully with the classroom teachers to assure curricular alignment. Stand alone groups are organized based on students' unique learning needs, learning style, language background, behavioural needs, and IEP objectives. The stand alone groups are also organized heterogeneneously (mixed proficiency levels). When planning the ENL Stand Alone schedule the ENL teachers consider the students' classification on the IEP, student-staffing ratio, students' age and the CR Part 154 mandate. The schedule is planned to provided the ELLs with the required number of ENL mandated units. In the Stand Alone model, alternate placement paraprofessionals accompany the students when they are pulled out for ENL service. Self-contained ENL Integrated and Stand Alone Model/Ungraded: P.811Q has one 12:1:1 self-contained ENL class and is being taught by an English speaking Special Education Teacher that also has a NYS Certificate in ENL. This class follows an ungraded, self-contained model and provides instruction in English, as per CR Part 154 mandate and students' IEP mandate. As all ELLs are designated to be at the entering/beginners level of English proficiency based on their results from the NYSESLAT test, they receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (8 forty-five minute periods). The self-contained class has a classroom library with English and multi-language books, a technology center that is equipped with computers and software that include Boardmaker, Writing with Symbols in English and text books that are in English. The teacher employs ENL methodologies and strategies such as TPR, The Language Experience Approach, Modeling and Bridging. The Orton Gillingham Structure Learning, Wilson Reading Program (Grades K-12) and Fundations (Grades K-2), all research-based programs are being used to help students learn to read and improve their decoding skills. This year the Unique Learning System, also a research-based curriculum, is being used to teach Social Studies and Science; the program is interactive and the teacher is able to create learning experiences for the students. ELA is taught following the Balanced Literacy Model. The NYS Common Core Curriculum is followed as a guide to instructional planning and assessment. High interest and low-readability books and materials are adapted, age appropriate and reflect the heritage cultures of the students. Ebooks are also available on-line for students to read. "News 2 You", Vizzle, Tar Heel Reader, SMILE and Brain Pop Jr are used to present content in various subjects and to teach ENL. The ENL self-contained class has a Math center with workbooks, manipulatives and calculators. The ENL teacher uses GoMath, Go Noodle, EQUALS to teach and practice addition, subtraction and counting money. Formal language and literacy training are infused into the daily routines and community-based instruction in order for ELLs to generalize skills to a variety of functional settings. In order for the ELLs in the class to generalize and practice the language skills they have learned, opportunities are provided for them to interact with other English speaking peers in the same school building such as mealtime, APE classes, field trips and school social events. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) There are 11 (BIS Spanish) students in one high school self-contained TBE class at the main site. All the students are at the Entering/Beginning Level of English Proficiency. These students are ungraded and classified as 12:1:4 students with severe cognitive disabilities. Students in the Entering/Beginning Level receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. They receive the ENL mandate from a certified ENL teacher. Based on 45 minutes 8 period day, the following language allocations are provided: ENL – 108 minutes per day HLA- 45 minutes per day 2018-19 CEP 71  Mathematics – 50 (HL)/10 English) Social Studies or Science- 35(HL)/10 English) Art/Music/Phys. Ed. – 45 (English using ENL& HL) Differentiated instruction in ENL, HLA and in content areas is provided throughout the day. Students are grouped by level of language fluency and academic proficiency for instruction whenever possible. c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) is provided by a Special Education Bilingual Teacher in a Self-Contained 12:1:4 Bilingual Spanish Classroom. There are 11 (TBE Spanish) students in one high school TBE class at the main site. All the students are at the Entering/Beginning Level of English Proficiency. Students in the Entering/Beginning Level receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. They receive the ENL mandate from a certified ENL teacher. Based on 45 minutes 8 period day, the following language allocations are provided: ENL – 90 minutes per day (45 minutes per day of Stand Alone ENL and 45 minutes per day of Integrated ENL) HLA- 45 minutes per day Mathematics – 35 (HL)/10 English) Social Studies or Science- 35(HL)/10 English) Art/Music/Phys. Ed. – 45 (English using ENL& HL) Differentiated instruction in ENL, HLA and in content areas is provided throughout the day. Students are grouped by level of language fluency and academic proficiency for instruction whenever possible. Home Language Arts (HLA): Students receive 45 minutes per day of Home Language Instruction (HLA) in the classroom. HLA instruction follows the tenets of Balanced Literacy, emphasizing the development of phonics and comprehension skills through the use of literature-based and standards-based materials. All the materials are adapted to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities and are in alignment with the students’ Individual Education Plan (IEP). Some of the native language materials in use include Servidores de la Comunidad (Policias, Bomberos, Enfermeras y Doctores, Dentistas, Granjeros, Bibliotecarios, Carteros, etc) by Dee Ready. El Tiempo y las Estaciones by Corey Phillips. Mi Jardin, Salimos de la Escuela by Irene Bordoy. Los Abuelos by Maria Rios. Latin America's Authors' Studies such as Jose Marti, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Pablo Neruda. HLA literacy activities are extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas by combining the interdisciplinary/thematic approach with Language Experiences. All the instructional materials and technology are adapted for the Alternate Assessment students. Adaptive storybooks and non-fiction books, storyboards, Mayer Johnson symbols, communication boards, augmentative communication devices, the engineered classroom, and structured classroom strategies are used to facilitate learning and comprehension. To comply with CCLS, the classroom library contains books in the native language and English. No standardized native language assessment can be used to assess the performance and progress of the TBE class due to the students' cognitive and language disabilities. However, the bilingual teacher uses informal observations, student performance on tasks, use of AAC devices (low and high tech) and communication boards to assess the students' progress in the acquisition of language skills. English Language Arts (ELA): Students receive English Language Arts 45 minutes per day. ELA include literature and content-based instruction and are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards CCLS and CR Part 154. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lesson. Teachers use a wide range of print, visual and digital resources designed for developing English and native language proficiency. Students in Alternate Assessment follow an adapted integrated curriculum based on the CCLS. However, English Language Arts is strongly emphasized in the TBE program through the engineered classroom (classroom is set up with a variety of low and high tech augmentative communication devices for student access) , Aided Language Stimulation Program, which is the “literacy curriculum” for both monolingual and bilingual students with severe disabilities at P.811Q. Specialized software is used to produce storyboards, communication and activity boards and multi-sensory materials to enhance comprehension and provide support for the bilingual students’ emerging 2018-19 CEP 72  literacy skills. Teachers use stories that are based on the students’ culture that will connect to students’ prior experience. Non-fiction books are adapted to meet the needs of the students. Instructional materials are also downloaded from the World Wide Web and District 75 website. Currently, teachers are utilizing Unique Learning System Curriculum lessons, Attainment Computer Software, Smart Board ebook presentations and adapting other instructional materials to meet the needs of their students. Students participate in classroom activities via the use of communication boards labeled with Mayer Johnson symbols and augmentative communication devices programmed with pre-recorded responses, signs, verbal responses, eye gazes, and through specially-designed switches hooked up to voice output devices, etc. ENL Instruction (TBE): Students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per day. The students in grades K-8 receive two units of ENL instruction at the entering/beginning and emerging and transitioning/intermediate levels and one unit at the expanding/advanced level of English proficiency. In grades 9-12 students receive three units of ENL (540 minutes) at the entering level and two units of ENL (360 minutes) at the emerging and the transitioning level of English proficiency. At the expanding level of English proficiency students receive one unit of ENL and one unit of ELA per week. A unit of instruction as defined by the state regulation is 180 minutes. There are presently no students in the TBE classes at the emerging, transitioning and expanding level of English proficiency. In order to help the students learn how to communicate in English via the communication devices in place for them, specialized instructional materials, adaptive technology devices, software, teacher-made materials, adapted books, communication boards, storyboards, and principals of behavior modification programs are used. ENL instruction is provided by a certified Special Education Bilingual Spanish teacher. ENL instruction follows the NYS ENL Standards and incorporates ENL methodology such as Cooperative Learning, and the Whole Language Approach. The ENL methodologies (e.g. Total Physical Response (TPR), the Natural Approach, and Language Experience Approach) are used with students with severe disabilities. The following sampling of instructional materials is used: Vizzle,Brain Pop and Tarheel Reader. English as a New Language (ENL) Model: ENL instruction is provided to the ELLs whose native languages are other than English. The ELLs at P.811Q require a longer period of time to become English proficient due to their multiple disabilities, cognitive delays and learning disabilities. Students will receive instruction in ENL and ELA. Wherever possible, students will be instructed in small groups. Teachers will review student performance data on a regular basis and design level/course standards to meet the diverse needs of the students. Students will receive ENL services as per their IEP, and in accordance with their proficiency levels indicated on the NYSESLAT. ELLs in grades K-8, receive two units of ENL (360 minutes) at the entering/beginning and emergingand transitioning/intermediate levels. The ELLs in grades 9-12 receive three units of ENL (540 minutes) at the entering/beginning level and 360 minutes at the emerging/low intermediate and 180 minutes at transitioning/intermediate levels and expanding/advanced level of English proficiency in accordance with Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154. At the Proficient/Commanding level students in all grades receive 90 minutes of Integrated Service. The following instructional materials and books are currently being used: Unique Learning System, Tarheel reader, BrainPop and teacher created specialized instructional materials and adapted books. Integrated Model/Ungraded: the ENL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with the regular sel-contained classroom or cluster teacher and provides language acquisition and vocabulary support using ENL methodologies and instructional materials. Within the Integrated Model the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher in all content areas. Students have access to an array of both printed and technology materials. To ensure that students meet the standards, ENL instructions follow the NYS ENL Standards and incorporate ENL methodology such as Cooperative Learning, and Whole Language Approach. The ENL methodologies (e.g. Total Physical Response (TPR), the Natural Approach, Language Experience Approach and Whole Language) are used with students with severe disabilities. Students with autism make use of the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) and other visual systems that promote communication and social skills development. ELLs receive the number of units of ENL instruction as per CR Part 154. ELLs also receive content area instruction by certified special education teachers. Students in alternate placement receive support from alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak their native languages. Stand Alone Model/Ungraded: The ENL teacher takes the ENL students out of their classrooms to a separate location for ENL instruction based on classroom ratios. ELLs work intensively in a small group or individually on the targeted language skills and 2018-19 CEP 73  on cultural activities. Instruction is provided in language acquisition skills, vocabulary development, and content areas. ENL teachers plan carefully with the classroom teachers to assure curricular alignment. Stand alone groups are organized based on students' unique learning needs, learning style, language background, behavioural needs, and IEP objectives. The Stand alone groups are also organized heterogeneneously (mixed proficiency levels). When planning the ENL Stand Alone schedule the ENL teachers consider the students' classification on the IEP, student-staffing ratio, students' age and the CR Part 154 mandate. The schedule is planned to provided the ELLs with the required number of ENL mandated units. In the Stand Alone model, alternate placement paraprofessionals accompany the students when they are pulled out for ENL service. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Area Instruction: Spanish and English are used in the TBE class consistently to teach the academic content areas following the 60/40 model. In Math students receive 30 minutes NL/ 15 minutes using ENL instruction. In Social Studies and Science students receive 30 NL/15 minutes using ENL. For the Arts, Music, Physical Education students receive 45 minutes per day using English and NL by paraprofessionals. The amount of use of the native language in the content areas is balanced with the students’ English proficiency. Students receive native language support by the classroom teacher and paraprofessionals who all speak the students' native language. In addition, students receive support from the assistant principal who is Spanish speaking. Students are instructed in Math, Science, Social studies, Art, and Music. Equals and GoMath curriculum are used to teach math skills to students and materials are modified and adapted to meet the special needs of the students. Go Math and Equals are used by the teachers to plan lessons. The math component section in the Unique Learning curriculum is also used to teach the students the following skills: telling times, measurement, numeration, and money. The Unique Learning System curriculum is used to access differentiated materials and to report progress in all content areas, i.e., ELA, Math,Social Studies and Science. Instructional Materials are available in both languages. Instruction is aligned with the recommendations for students in Standardized Assessment, but adapted to the needs of students with severe disabilities. Alternate Assessment students follow Common Core Learning Standards and the newly created NYS Extensions aligned to CCLS. Age appropriate multi-sensory materials, activities relevant to the interest, cognitive ability, and stage of language development of the student, ENL methodology, and adaptive technology are used to enhance the students’ understanding of the content areas. Assessments are on-going and are administered in Spanish and English. Scaffolding strategies are employed to attain significant ENL and academic development. Some of the scaffolding strategies used are modeling, bridging, and contextualization. However, these strategies are modified and adapted to meet the special instructional needs of the students at P 811Q. The following is a sample of the instructional materials and books being used in the content areas, literacy: Servidores de la comunidad by Dee Ready, El Tiempo de las Estaciones by Cory Philip, Mi Jardin by Irene Bordoy, Los Abuelos by Maria Rios. Assessments are on-going and are administered in Spanish and English. English as a New Language (ENL) Model: ENL teacher participates in team meeting to coplan with monolingual teachers who have ELL students in their classrooms. To address the special needs of students with emotional and severe communication disabilities, the following interventions will be followed: Positive Behavior Supports, Functional Communication Approaches, Balanced Literacy Approaches, Bilingual communication boards and alternative communication systems (AAC) in the native language and English. To help the students learn how to communicate in English via the communication systems in place for them, specialized instructional materials, adaptive technology devices, software, teacher made materials, adapted books, communication boards and story boards are used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs with disabilities whose IEP mandate is Bilingual Instruction are grouped according to their native language. At the present time there are only enough students to form one 12:1:4 Spanish Bilingual Education self-contained class. A 12:1:1 self-2018-19 CEP 74  contained ENL class composed of bilingual students of other languages with Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals and ENL only students was formed. All other bilingual students of other languages have Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals in their classroom. Informal translated diagnostic assessments are given to students prior to unit of study (Unique/SANDI). Bilingual teacher adapts ongoing assessments based on students proficiency level in Spanish and English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A.Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) SIFE students may receive the following interventions: extended instructional time, tutoring, one-to-one tutoring for students requiring additional support. Students will receive instruction in ENL and ELA. Wherever possible, students will be instructed in small groups. Teachers will review student performance data on a regular basis and design level/course standards to meet the diverse needs of the students. To address the special needs of students with emotional and severe communication disabilities, the following interventions will be followed: Positive Behavior Supports, Functional Communication Approaches, Balance Literacy Approaches, Bilingual communication boards and alternative communication systems (AAC) in the native language and English. B. Plan for Newcomers (Students new to English Language School System): Services to newcomers may include: tutoring, Buddy program, developing initial literacy in native language, nurturing environment to facilitate language production in English, and/or assignment of alternate placement paraprofessionals. Newcomers who meet the age requirement will take part in the NYSAA. C. Plan for ELL students with 4-6 years of ENL: The ELLs in this group will continue to received the above described interventions. Differentiated instruction will be provided to them according to their language proficiency level. The Unique Learning System Curriculum, an on-line, comprehensive, age appropriate, differentiated standard-based curriculum designed for students with significant disabilities will be used. Vizzle,Brain Pop Junior, Brain Pop ENL a web-based animated educational site will be used to engage students in challenging activities; and for students to use in the areas of English, mathematics, social studies, science, arts, music and health. Students will have the opportunity to participate in the weekend Title III program. All instructional materials will continue to be adapted to meet the students' physcial, cognitive, and communication needs. D. Plan for Long Term ELLs (more than 6 years): The student population at P811Q is made up of students with autism, intellectual disabilities, and multiple disabilities. The disabilities can be severe and profound. Most of the students’ Individual Education Plans (IEP) indicate they are only participating in Alternate Assessment. There are just a few students in the inclusion program that participate in Standardized Assessment. In order to support students in long term bilingual or ENL programs, the following instructional interventions are implemented: All instruction and instructional materials are specially designed, modified and adapted to meet the students’ unique learning style and communication needs. All materials are differentiated based on individual student needs and proficiency levels. The students follow a modified curriculum to permit them to understand concepts, learn and retain new tasks, communicate to the best of their ability, and participate in the classroom activities. These students require more than six years to become English proficient. E. Students Reaching Proficiency: Students who achieve the commanding(proficient) level of English on the NYSESLAT and meet the exit requirements will be placed in a monolingual class after IEP conference. Students who no longer require ENL services according to IEP will be supported for two years with Integrated ENL services. This transition plan is for students in Transitional Bilingual Education and ENL students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 75  Plan for ELLs with Disabilities: The following strategies are used with students with disabilities, Whole Language Approach, English Language (high and low communication devices, communciation boards, PECS (Picture Exchange Communication Systems), special software, Multi-sensory approaches and materials, as well as multi-cultural universally designed and age-appropriate materials, and Balanced Literacy Model, the priniciples of differentiated instruction, such as functional groupings, mini lessons and adapted materials. Adapted materials are used by ELLs with disabilities. Students follow an Alternate Assessment Curriculum based on Common Core Learning Standards. ELLs will be using the Unique Learning System, a curriculum designed for students with significant disabilities. Teachers of ELLs modify the core curriculum using Vizzle, Boardmaker, Powerpoint, and create adapted materials, such as, ebooks that are inter-active and can be viewed on computers and Smart Board. Teachers also have available specialized materials that can be downloaded from District 75 website that can be used to enhance Literacy, Math, Science and Social Studies. In addition, ELL classes participate in Getting Ready to Learn (GRTL), basic yoga technigues that improve attention, task performance and behavior before instruction is given. ELL classes engage in video modeling and create social scripts to reinforce appropriate social behavior in school and at home. ELLs with disabilities receive all their mandated services listed in the IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We adjust teacher schedules by providing common planning time(Department Meetings) for teachers to meet weekly and to also to have Collaborative Inquiry Team Meetings. We adjust students' class schedules based on ENL needs throughout the year. ELLs will be using and adapting Unique Learning System, a curriculum designed for students with significant disabilities. Teachers of ELLs modify/adapt the curriculum using Vizzle, Boardmaker, Powerpoint, and create adapted materials, such as, ebooks that are inter-active and can be viewed on computers and Smart Board. Teachers also have available specialized materials that can be downloaded from District 75 website that can be used to enhance Literacy, Math, Science and Social Studies. In addition, ELL classes participate in Getting Ready to Learn (GRL), engage in video modeling and create social scripts to reinforce appropriate social behavior in school and at home. ELLs with disabilities receive all their mandated services listed in the IEP. ELLs also have the opportunity to interact with english speaking peers during meal time, and non-disabled peers during special events and field trips. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P811Q serves students with severe to profound cognitive and/or physical disabilities, and this is the central consideration in the development of the school’s LAP and instructional programs. There is a well-documented paucity of research in the area of language development for ELLs with severe cognitive disabilities. When making policy and planning for instruction, educators working with this population are by necessity guided by research with typically developing ELLs and by best practices in the fields of both special education and augmentative/alternative communication development. ELL students follow an Alternative curriculum based on New York State Extensions of CCLS for ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. ELLs participate in NYSESLAT and NYSAA assessment. Academic language development, curricula and instruction will continue to be adapted to the grade and age levels of the ELL students, and sophisticated technology will be employed to adapt and create appropriate materials. ENL, TBE, classroom and cluster teachers will continue to receive intensive training through school and district workshops on how to work with ELLs with severe and profound disabilities. Workshops will be offered on special teaching methodologies and on the development of adapted instructional materials. To help the ELLs improve their linguistic and academic performance, the following interventions are used at P811Q: Reading Milestones/Edmark Wilson Fundations Balanced Literacy Approaches To Help the ELLs in Math, the following interventions are used: Go Math 2018-19 CEP 76  Ablenet EQUALS To help the ELLs improve in Social Studies and Social Skills we use: Positive Behavior Supports for students with emotional difficulties. Functional Communication Approaches for ELLs with severe communication disabilities. To help the ELLS in Science we use the following interventions: Effective Learning Experiences and Unit Planning. Bilingual communication boards and augmentative and alternative communication systems (AAC) in the native language and in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs will be implemented. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no plans to discontinue any programs and services for ELLs this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have the same opportunities as their English speaking peers to participate in community based work sites, school social events, girls club, student council, school chorus and band, and after-school extracurriculuar activities, such as C.H.A.M.P.S. program and 4 Saturday Title III Programs for both students and guardians . Participation in these activities will enable ELLs to practice their acquired language skills and work on their social communication skills in least restrictive environments. P811Q's successful Title III programs of the past six years provided low-tech AAC devices, modes of access and technology training to students in the presence of their families both at school and at home, resulting in enhanced communicative opportunities throughout the day in generalized settings for our ELLS with disabilities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) and ENL Program: All the instructional materials and technology are adapted for the Alternate Assessment students. Adaptive storybooks and non-fiction books, storyboards, Mayer Johnson symbols, communication boards, augmentative communication devices, the engineered classroom, and Structured Teaching Strategies are used to facilitate learning and comprehension. To comply with NYC Literacy requirements, each classroom library contains books in the native language and English(TBE). Teachers use informal observations, student performance on tasks, use of AAC devices (low and high tech) and communication boards to assess the students' progress in the acquisition of language skills. Currently teachers are using Unique Learning curriculum, Vizzle, SmartBoard, E-books to deliver daily instruction. SANDI is used as a Formative Assessments to determine IEP Goals and Objectives, Student Progress, Instructional Focus and Functioning Levels regarding content and skill. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students whose IEP recommendation is bilingual services, but for whom no bilingual class placement exists are assigned an Alternate Placement paraprofessional who speaks the student's native language and supports them throughout the day by speaking their native/home language which are often paired with translation in English so that our ELLs have increased exposure to the new language. When a need arises to hire new paraprofessionals, preference is given to applicants who speak the native languages of bilingual students. ELLs who speak languages other than English are clustered in the same classes to facilitate providing them the required ENL units as per CR Part 154, which are provided by licensed ENL teachers in a Stand alone/Integrated program. The alternate placement paraprofessionals participate in collaborative planning and receive professional development in ENL and Bilingual Education. 2018-19 CEP 77  TBE classes conduct lessons using the Home Language/Native Language in all content areas during the majority day based on the NYSESLAT scores/levels. All paraprofessionals in TBE classes speak the Native/Home language of the students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Age appropriate multi-sensory materials, activities relevant to the interest, cognitive ability, and stage of language development of the student, ENL methodology, and adaptive technology are used to enhance the students’ understanding of the content areas. Assessments are on-going and are administered in Spanish and English. Scaffolding strategies are employed to attain significant ENL and academic development. Some of the scaffolding strategies used are modeling, bridging, and contextualization. However, these strategies are modified and adapted to meet the special instructional needs of the students at P811Q. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) and ENL Program: 8 building (co-locations) have access to all materials. We are able to serve students using ENL teachers from these General Education settings. All the instructional materials and technology are adapted for the Alternate Assessment students. Adaptive storybooks and non-fiction books, storyboards, Mayer Johnson symbols, communication boards, augmentative communication devices, the engineered classroom, and Structured Teaching Strategies are used to facilitate learning and comprehension. TBE classroom library contains books in the native language and English(TBE). Teachers use informal observations, student performance on tasks, use of AAC devices (low and high tech) and communication boards to assess the students' progress in the acquisition of language skills. Currently teachers are using Unique Learning curriculum, Vizzle, SmartBoard, E-books to deliver daily instructions. SANDI is used as a Formative Assessments to determine IEP Goals and Objectives, Student Progress, Instructional Focus and Functioning Levels regarding content and skill. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Outreach Efforts are made by the TBE/ENL teachers, Assistant Principals, School Unit Coordinators and Parent Coordinator. Parents who do not respond are called and encouraged to attend our school so that we may do an intake with a school team present. Services to newcomers may include: tutoring, buddy program, nurturing environment to facilitate receptive and expressive use of the English language, and/or assignment of alternate placement paraprofessionals. New students are also given the opportunity to be given the HLIS and NYSITELL prior to the beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs that are standardized assessment can continue to choose a language elective (Spanish or French) if they want to in their inclusive setting. At this time, we do not offer our Alternate Assessment students any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, we do not offer a dual language program. 2018-19 CEP 78  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? District and school-level sponsored professional development and opportunities to attend outside workshops are provided to ENL, TBE teachers and administrators, paraprofessionals, related service providers, secretaries and parent coordinator throughout the year. Presentations and workshops are conducted during Professional Development Period on Monday afternoons and on special professional development days by ENL and Bilingual teachers and outside presenters. Special education teachers receive 10 hours of Jose P. training. We plan on providing Jose P. training for all our new/transferred teachers. We plan on working with the District 75 Office of ELLs to support this training. The school maintains a file with the dates on which teachers received Jose P. training. A workshop on how to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary, to middle and/or middle to high school will be offered to staff (teachers, parent coordinator, counselors, and paraprofessionals) in January 2019. All teachers have been encouraged to subscribe to DELLSS and to keep themselves informed of new developments in the field. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrative staff have had the opportunity to attend outside conferences and conventions, such as the yearly New York State Association of Bilingual Education and the ENL Academy. TBE and ENL teachers also receive periodic instructional support from the District ELL coach. Teachers are afforded the opportunity to engage in collaborative planning with their colleagues, non-special education teachers and paraprofessionals. Weekly department and classroom staff team meetings are held. In addition, teachers can select to use their Professional Development Activity period and common planning periods to work with ENL, bilingual, hearing, speech, and vision teachers, and other related service providers to exchange information about the learning needs of the ELLs and effective instructional strategies. Alternate placement paraprofessionals also participate in collaborative planning and receive professional development in ENL and Bilingual Education. Planned development activities for this school year include: October 2018- Workshops on Adapting CCLS to create tasks aligned to NYSAA (which include our ELLs). December 2018- Workshop on: Improving Communication Skills Using Augmentative Devices (IPad) in an Engineered Classroom January 2019-Workshop on: Assisting articulating ELLs from elementary to middle and /or middle to high school March 2019-ENL and Bilingual Teachers will attend an in-house workshop on: Use of Augmentative Communication Devices in Literacy Lessons in the ELL Classroom. September 2018 – June 2019: The ELL liaison teacher will attend all District 75 ELL Compliance Meetings and provide turn key training. October 2019- Workshops on Adapting CCLS to create tasks aligned to NYSAA (which include our ELLs). December 2019- Workshop on: Improving Communication Skills Using Augmentative Devices (IPad) in an Engineered Classroom January 2020-Workshop on: Assisting articulating ELLs from elementary to middle and /or middle to high school March 2020-ENL and Bilingual Teachers will attend an in-house workshop on: Use of Augmentative Communication Devices in Literacy Lessons in the ELL Classroom. September 2019 – June 2020: The ELL liaison teacher will attend all District 75 ELL Compliance Meetings and provide turn key training. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School will provide Professional Development on Monday afternoons specifically on ELL instruction. Agendas and attendance records of all PDs provided to all teachers are kept in the main office. ENL teachers will register for PDs offered by District Office and by DELLSS office. 2018-19 CEP 79  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P811Q will host annual meetings for parents of ELLs to meet with ENL/TBE teachers to discuss language proficiency assessment results and language development needs of their children in all content areas. Teachers will use Tuesday afternoon, a designated time, for Parent Outreach. Teachers will keep a log of all meetings including telephone conversations and outcomes. Parent Coordinator will assist in setting up meeting time and dates, and also additional outreach if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.811Q has an active PSA (Parent Staff Association) and School Leadership Team. Some of the PSA and SLT members are parents of ELL or former ELL students. They participate in school sponsored celebrations, fund drives, attend special assemblies, and join the school in celebrating its diversity. The PSA and parent volunteers each year visit the school during holidays and offer other parents the opportunity to purchase items to support the PSA and the school with funding graduation expenses for underprivileged students. Parents of ELLs are also invited by Parent coordinator to participate in transition fairs and post-secondary life transition options. Parent Coordinator also provides interpreters for all workshops given by P811Q. Parents are also invited to attend Title III workshops on literacy and science offered in the Spring to become familiar with the curriculum and adaptive materials used in ENL and TBE programs. During Parent-Teacher conferences, parents of ELL students are invited and encouraged to share their concerns with the bilingual and ENL teachers and school administrators about their children’s education, placement, and language use in the classroom. This evaluative information from parents is used to improve the delivery of services to ELLs. Beside sending out Title III Parent Surveys to assess what parents need in the home to address communication skills, we also make home visits and provide Saturday Clinics and Workshops on Communication and Access. The school publishes a monthly calendar that is sent home outlining the upcoming events for the month. Classroom teachers of ENL and TBE students invite parents to participate and to share information on their family’s cultural heritage when they cover the unit of study on the family. Feedback from parents and SLT members have been positive on the quality of the workshops presented and the value of the information. The above mentioned parental involvement activities always have interpreters available to assist parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not Applicable 2018-19 CEP 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Penny Ryan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P811Q School DBN: 75Q811 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Penny Ryan Title Principal Michel Rueda Assistant Principal 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 Sasha Lopez Xiu Cao Li Saine Arroyave Luis Montoro/Bilingual Victoria Donofrio/ENL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 82  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q811 School Name: P811Q-Marathon School Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Sasha Lopez Parent Coordinator NO Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An analysis of the ATS Reports: POB/Lang/Geo (RPOB) and Emergency Contact List (RCON) is done each September to identify the home language students use at home. -The Home Language Survey of new students are checked to see what languages are spoken at home. -A review of the current school year Student Emergency Contact Cards is done to determine the parents' preferred language in which they want to receive notices and Pupil Accounting Secretary updates information in ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 83  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral BENGALI BURMESE CHINESE ANY CANTONESE CROATIAN FRENCH GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE JAPANESE KOREAN MANDARIN MALAYALAM NEPALI ENGLISH PASHTO PILIPINO PUNJABI RUSSIAN SPANISH TIBETAN 7 1 10 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1.74 .25 2.49 0 0 0 .25 .25 .25 .25 0 .25 .25 6 1 4 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 1.49 .25 1.0 .25 0 0 .25 .25 .25 .25 1.0 .25 .25 331 82.34 330 82.09 1 1 2 1 43 0 .25 .25 .5 .25 10.7 0 0 1 2 1 46 1 0 .25 .5 .25 11.44 .25 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 84  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Blue Emergency Cards HLIS to all new admits to the DOE throughout the school year. Parent Teacher Conference Announcements After school program notice September 5, 2018 Date admitted 2 weeks prior to date September 5, 2018 NYS testing dates September 5, 2018 Translated Blue Emergency Cards distributed Translated HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) provided Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/Tuesday afternoon Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/Tuesday afternoon Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/Tuesday afternoon 2018-19 CEP 85  School Workshop Notices when distributed SLT letters / announcements when distributed Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/Tuesday afternoon Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/Tuesday afternoon 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Intake/HLIS Meeting for all new admits to DOE throughout the year. Date admitted or Date of intake interpretation service(s)? Translators are available at multiple sites and will be redeployed when needed. Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/tuesday afternoon Parent-Teacher Conferences or Curriculum Nights 4 x a year. when distributed SLT meetings once a month when distributed Annual IEP meeting or Reevaluation Meeting every year during annual review date Translators are available for all parent conferences if parents request Translated by staff and phone call by bilingual staff during Parent Engagement time/tuesday afternoon Translators are available at parents request Translation provided by staff at parents' request 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School staff will translate for parents who prefer oral communication in their native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 86  During Professional Development in September all staff members are informed of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the website they can go to for translation services and over the phone interpretation services. This information is distributed to all classes and posted in the main office. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents and Guardians will receive a written communication advising them of the their rights to translation and interpretation services. Parents of new admits will be informed of their rights to translation and interpretation services by the Pupil Accounting Secretary and will be given a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 Attachment A: Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities in their preferred language. Welcome Poster in Entrance . Language ID Guide at Security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? On Tuesday afternoons during Parent Outreach designated time, staff who speak parents' home language will ask parents about the quality and availability of translation services that our school provides throughout the year. Staff will report feedback to supervising assistant principals. The comments and requests the parents share in their daily communication book will be translated and shared with administrative team and classroom team. 2018-19 CEP 87 
