2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R004 School Name: P.S. 004 MAURICE WOLLIN Principal: SUZANNE DIMITRI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Maurice Wollin 353100010004 Pre-Kindergarten - Grade 5 Grades Served: School Number (DBN): 31R004 School Address: NedraLane, Staten Island, NY 10312 Phone Number: 718-984-1197 Fax: 718-984-2324 School Contact Person: SuzanneDiMitri Email Address: sdimitri@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 SuzanneDiMitri Donna Fellows Joanna Boylan, Lisa Krasnopolski DonnaFellows N/A N/A N/A District Information VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Building A Room # 141 Staten Island, N.Y. 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5667 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Staten Island FSC Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island NY 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-755-7339 Phone Number: 718-391-6109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Suzanne DiMitri Donna Fellows Joanna Boylan Dana Rodriguez Theresa Heuser Christine New *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristin Nicholaou HarleyLeibowitz Lori Welborn Pamela Gogarty Lauren Lentini Judi Mondone Diane Molloy Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview MISSION 2018-19 CEP 9  Our mission statement was developed through the collaboration of representatives of the various stakeholders in the PS 4 community. Our statement supports the mission of Community School District 31 and represents the shared values and priorities of our school community. The mission of the Maurice Wollin School community is to work collaboratively to foster an environment in which all children are equipped with the critical thinking, social, and emotional skills needed to succeed in the global society of the 21st century. Our core belief is that we are responsible for ensuring that all children achieve their personal best and therefore, we prioritize high expectations for all students. We maintain these expectations through cycles of professional learning, reflection, and adjustment and a commitment to growing our practice to best meet the needs of our diverse student population. All stakeholders work together to model and foster genuine respect, confidence, and the ongoing pursuit of knowledge. At P.S. 4 our motto is: P.ersonal S.uccess 4 All 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 4 is located on the south shore of Staten Island. Our building is situated at the end of a cul-de-sac and we are surrounded by several housing developments. We have an active PTA and parent involvement is notable. P.S.4 is an inclusive setting. Approximately 36% of our population is comprised of students with disabilities. We are proud to include the ASD Nest Program among our classes offered. In an effort to increase arts education for students, we partner with Dancing Classrooms to provide grade 5 students the opportunity to learn the art of ballroom dancing. Each year we strive to provide arts based residencies to each grade of students. Funding is provided through grant awards, PTA, fundraising, and school funds. This year we plan to continue work as a Learning Partners school as we continue to delve deeply into conceptual understanding in math and collaborate to build equity and excellence in our schools. In addition to our Learning Partners work, we will be collaborating with NTN to further support our work in developing conceptual understanding. We work hard to support our highest need students through professional learning, support personnel, and specialized training. Our Nest teachers all attend courses offered through partnership with New York University prior to teaching in the program. Teachers in the Nest implement supports and strategies designed to develop social skills and enable students to thrive in the general education setting. Over the years, many of these strategies have been generalized throughout our school community. All self contained classrooms and classrooms in grades K and 1 have a teacher trained in Orton-Gillingham method. This year we will also partner with our colleagues at P.S. 41 to participate in a study group around specially designed instruction. We are united as a school community in the objective of achieving our mission. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our largest student subgroup is Students with Disabilities, comprising approximately 36% of our population. Programs to support SWDs include the ASD Nest program, Horizon, 12:1 and 12:1:1 classes, and ICT classes. Student needs vary but academically, all students benefit from UDL strategies that increase access to the curriculum. We offer a wide range of support services including speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, counseling, and SETSS. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our school is celebrating our achievements in the area of Collaborative Teachers. Our overall score increased by .59 with significant gains in Peer Collaboration with a score increase of 2.13; Quality of Professional Development with a score increase of 2.47; and School Commitment with a score increase of 1.18. In addition we are also celebrating our achievement in Rigorous Instruction, Common Core Shifts in Math with a score increase of 1.20. We are proud to have increased our state Math proficiency scores by 13%. This year, our key areas for focus are: Program Coherence, overall score 1.31; Teacher Influence, overall score 2.14; and Common Core Shifts in Literacy, overall score 2.00. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R004 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 745 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 35 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 37.0% % Attendance Rate 34.8% % Reduced Lunch 5.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 18.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 67.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 122 123 4 94.1% 2.4% 34.5% 1.7% 9.5% 2.1% 4 1% 9.4 60.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review feedback indicated a need to increase the consistency of rigorous habits in our curricula and academic tasks. Feedback further indicated that planned tasks have yet to provide for rigor and higher-order thinking or to provide access towards cognitive engagement across grade levels and that instructional strategies have yet to provide multiple entry points into challenging curricula as reflected in student discussion and rigorous work products. PPO feedback provided during the 2017-2018 school year indicated progress in teachers' ability to effectively release responsibility to their students. It was also noted that there was increased evidence of purposefully differentiated tasks, co-planning, guided reading, parallel teaching, self-assessment and use of learning progressions. Areas for growth included goal setting and increasing student independence during tasks. Our 2018 ELA state test results indicate overall proficiency at 61%. This represents an increase in proficiency of 10%. Our 2018 Math state test results indicate overall proficiency at 61%. This represents an increase of 13%. Our 2018 School Quality Guide indicates a score increase in Rigorous Instruction from 2.12 in 2017 to 2.34 in 2018. In spite of the increase, we are still under performing the city and the district. Priority need: Our 2018 score in the area of Common Core Shifts in Literacy is 2.00 which, although it represents 85% positive responses, is significantly lower than our score in Common Core Shifts in Math and is lower than the city and the district. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019, we will see a 5% increase in the average score of reading checkpoint assessments for students in grades 2-5 as compared to November average scores for the same group of students, as a result of implementation of Universal Design for Learning strategies to increase student access to curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly professional learning group meetings are scheduled for each grade. During this time teachers and supervisors: Teachers and students in grades 2-5 9/18-10/18 Curriculum work Grade 2-5 teachers, supervisors, coach  collaborate to engage in inquiry work to customize instructional strategies incorporating UDL strategies for access in reading.  use student data to revise curriculum maps to ensure that school goals are being met, instruction is rigorous, and access is provided for all learners. Universal Literacy Coach is providing professional development in reading for early childhood classes. Grade 2 teachers and students Literacy Coach will focus on coaching teachers in grades 3-5 methods to implement UDL strategies for access to rigorous tasks and challenging texts during independent reading work. Grade 3-5 ELA teachers and students 11/18-2/19 Inquiry cycles alternated with data review for all ELA teachers 3/19-6/19 continued for ELA teachers of grades 3-5 Weekly beginning 9/18 through 6/19 Weekly beginning 11/18 through 6/19 Grade 2 teachers, ULit coach, supervisors Grade 3-5 ELA teachers, coach, supervisors Students will engage in goal setting toward access to increasingly complex texts. Teachers and students in grades 2-5 Onging 11/18-6/19 Grade 2-5 ELA teachers, coach, supervisors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in October 2018 and ongoing through June 2019 classroom teachers will offer opportunities for parents to deepen their understanding of Rigorous instruction through parent workshops and resources on class/school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources Teachers, coach, supervisors, paraprofessionals, ULit coach Instructional Resources Accessing Complex Texts by Douglas Fisher and Nancy Frey Cast.org (UDL) Common Core Learning Standards Schedule Adjustments Weekly Professional Learning Group sessions for teachers in grades K-5 are built into the schedule Monday professional learning time Common preps on each grade Lunch and Learn professional learning opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 we will see a 2% increase in the average score of reading checkpoint assessments for students in grades 2-5 as compared to November average scores for the same group of students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Checkpoint assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2016-2017, 183 incident reports were filed in OORS. 138 incidents were level 3 or below. 45 were level 4. There were no level 5 incidents. In 2017-2018, 116 incident reports were filed in OORS. 83 were level 3 or below. 32 were level 4 and 1 was level 5. This represents a 63% decrease in the number of OORS incidents reported. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicates that 44% of teachers who teach students in grades pre-k through 5 agreed or strongly agreed that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school. Our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates that 61% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10% decrease in the number of student behavior incidents compared to June 2018 as evidenced by OORS reports. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of a PBIS program supported by the Regional Special Education Technical Assistance Support Center. Entire school community 9/18-6/19 Crisis de-escalation training (TCIS) for all staff members working with students who are at high risk for behavioral crises. Teachers, paras, and school aides as appropriate As available 9/18 - 6/19 Supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers, paras, school aides Supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers, paras, school aides Discretionary funding is used to increase guidance support so that one counselor can work proactively with high risk students and to be available to de-escalate crisis situations. Implementation of a behavior referral system (SWIS) that will enable us to keep data on student behavior and provide appropriate intervention and support. Monthly character development assemblies for all students. Teachers attend with classes enabling them to generalize concepts into the classroom. Professional development for staff:  Crisis de-escalation  Citywide behavioral Expectations  Progressive discipline  PBIS implementation Focus on social and emotional instruction through our Learning Partners cohort activities. Supervisors, Guidance Counselor, At-risk students Supervisors, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Students Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Students, Parents, Supervisors 9/18-6/19 Supervisors, guidance counselors 10/18-6/19 Supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers 10/18-5/19 Guidance counselors, Teachers Supervisors, Teachers, Coach, Paraprofessionals, 9/18-6/19 Supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers Guidance Counselors Supervisors, Teachers, Guidance Counselors 10/18-6/19 Supervisors 2018-19 CEP 19  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Revised PBIS plan will be introduced in November and posted on the school website for the remainder of the school year; Following each monthly assembly parents receive a newsletter covering the content of the assembly and offering strategies for character development at home; as needed, parents will be invited in for meetings to review crisis intervention/behavioral plans for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources Supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, Borough Field Support Center personnel Schedule Adjustments Monthly assemblies programmed into the schedule Monday professional development time Common preps on each grade Relieving caseload for full-time guidance counselor for a more flexible schedule to address crises and work proactively with high risk students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 we will see a 10% decrease in the number of OORS reports made as compared the number made by February 1, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2018 School Quality Guide indicates a score increase for Collaborative Teachers from 2.89 in 2017 to 3.48 in 2018. Results indicate that we are slightly under performing both district and city. Results also indicate that teachers desire more opportunities to design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together and to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels, along with a need for improved collaboration among supervisors, teachers, and staff. Our 2018 ELA test results indicate overall proficiency at 61%. This represents an increase in proficiency of 10%. Our 2018 Math test results indicate overall proficiency at 61%. This represents an increase of 13%. In our 2018 School Quality Guide indicates a score increase in Rigorous Instruction from 2.12 in 2017 to 2.34 in 2018. In spite of the increase, we are still under performing the city and the district. Priority needs: Our 2018 score in the area of Quality of Student Discussion is 3.73 which represents 77% positive responses. Our 2018 score in the area of Peer Collaboration is 3.13 which represents 88% positive responses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 5% increase in evidence of practice in Mathematical Practice #3 (engaging in rigorous mathematical discussions that evidence conceptual understanding of content through the use of pictorial and concrete representation) as measured by the ATLAS Tool compared to proficiency levels from November 2018. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly professional learning group meetings are scheduled for each grade. During this time teachers and supervisors: Teachers and students in grades K-5 9/18-10/18 Curriculum work Classroom math teachers, supervisors, coach  collaborate to engage in inquiry work to customize instructional strategies incorporating UDL strategies for access to mathematical discussions.  use student data to revise curriculum maps to ensure that school goals are being met, instruction is rigorous, and access is provided for all learners. Classroom teachers will collaborate directly with an instructional coach from the National Teacher Network (NTN) to develop instructional strategies that deepen conceptual understanding with a focus on discussion. All teachers of math, grades K-5 As part of the Algebra 4 All initiative, Math Talks will be utilized in all 5th grade classrooms. Supervisors, 5th grade teachers and students 11/18-6/19 Inquiry cycles alternated with data review for Grade 3-5 math teachers. 3/19-6/19 Inquiry cycles alternated with data review for Grade K-2 teachers 9/18-6/19 On site coaching and planning, 3 days per month 7/18-6/19 Workshops: Summer Institute Classroom math teachers, supervisors, NTN coach 5th grade math teachers, supervisors, NTN coach 2018-19 CEP 22 Collaboration in the D31 Divide and Conquer cohort 2 will enable teachers in grades 2-4 to enhance instructional practices around mathematical discussions. Supervisors, math teachers in grades 2-4 2018, 10/16/18, 12/11/18, 1/30/19, 3/15/19, 5/21/19 9/18-6/19 Workshops: 9/26/18, 10/24/18, 11/28/18, 12/19/18, 1/23/19, 2/27/19, 3/27/19, 4/17/19, 5/29/19, 6/19/19 As a Learning Partners school we will be collaborating with partner schools to develop rigorous instructional practices in math. Grades K-4 9/18-6/19 Meetings 9/24/18 10/26/18 12/6/18 1/31/19 3/7/19 5/13/19 Grade 2-4 math teachers, supervisors Grade K-4 math teachers, supervisors, NTN coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in October 2018 and ongoing through June 2019 classroom teachers will offer opportunities for parents to deepen their understanding of mathematical discussion through parent workshops and resources on class/school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  Human Resources Teachers, coaches, supervisors, NTN consultant, Learning Partners facilitator, Learning Partners Host and partner school staff Instructional Resources UDL strategies Common Core Learning Standards Eureka Math Algebra 4 All Divide and Conquer Schedule Adjustments Weekly Professional Learning Group sessions for teachers in grades K-5 are built into the schedule Monday professional development time Common preps on each grade Lunch and Learn professional learning opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, we will see a 2% increase in Mathematical Practice #3 as measured by the ATLAS Tool, compared to November rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATLAS Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review indicates a need for improvement in the instructional core. Our 2018 School Quality Guide Program Coherence score is 1.31. This is an increase of .31 from 2017. Although we saw a slight increase, we are still performing far below district and city percentages. The results also indicate a need to increase opportunities for teachers to have input into the selection and development of instructional materials. PPO feedback provided during the 2017-2018 school year indicated progress in teachers' ability to effectively release responsibility to their students. It was also noted that there was increased evidence of purposefully differentiated tasks, co-planning, guided reading, parallel teaching, self-assessment and use of learning progressions. Areas for growth included replacing all high inference feedback to teachers with low inference feedback and improvement of tools used to track feedback to ensure that it is aligned with our goals. Priority needs: Our 2018 score in the area of Program Coherence is 1.31 which represents 63% positive responses. This is significantly lower than lower than the city and the district. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of four structured cycles of observations, feedback that is targeted to our goals, and the utilization of a feedback tracker, teachers will receive timely and high quality, low inference feedback on their pedagogical practices. This feedback will lead to an overall increase of 5% in the average MOTP score at our school. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Observations will be done in four cycles and each supervisor will focus on a curriculum area and provide targeted feedback aligned to our school goals. All Advance eligible teachers Cycle #1: September/October Cycle #2: November/December Cycle #3: January Cycle #4: February/March To monitor the evidence of change from prior feedback, supervisors will use a feedback tracker. Weekly professional learning group meetings are scheduled for each grade. During this time teachers and supervisors: Teachers, coach, and supervisors  collaborate to engage in inquiry work to customize instructional strategies incorporating UDL strategies for access in reading and access to mathematical discussions.  use student date to revise curriculum maps to ensure that school goals are being met, instruction is rigorous, and access is provided for all learners. The PD team will meet monthly. The work of the team will include: Teachers on the team, Principal  Review of data to develop and revise the professional development plan for the year 9/18-10/18 Principal and assistant principals 11/18-12/18 1/19 2/19-3/19 9/18-6/19 Supervisors, coaches, teachers Monday Grade 4 and Arts clusters; Tuesday Grade 1 and Social Studies; Wednesday Grades 2 and 5; Thursday Grade 3 and Science; Friday Grade K. 9/18-6/19 Last Tuesday of every month Supervisors, coaches, teachers 2018-19 CEP 26  Check in with assigned groups of teachers to gauge the effectiveness of the PD being offered during OPW time. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in October 2018 and ongoing through June 2019 classroom teachers will offer opportunities for parents to deepen their understanding of mathematical discussion and rigorous instruction through parent workshops and resources on class/school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources All teachers, coaches, supervisors, paraprofessionals, TDEC Instructional Resources Professional texts to be used as part of PD protocol; titles determined by teacher interest Schedule Adjustments Monday professional development time Common preps on each grade Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 there will a 2.5% in the average MOTP score as compared to average score from June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Progress Tracker 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2018-2019 School Quality Guide indicates a score of 3.94 in Strong Family-Community Ties. Priority needs: Our 2018 score in the area of Parent Involvement, opportunity to volunteer time to support their school scored 82% in positive responses. Although high in positive responses, this is our lowest indicator in Parent Involvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) regularly, resulting in a 10% increased positive response on the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers on each grade will offer parents 3 opportunities (in addition to Open School Week) to participate in the classroom activities. Opportunities may include: Teachers, parents/families 9/18-6/19 PTA, Parent Coordinator, Supervisors -Publishing parties -Guest/mystery reader -Sharing a talent, hobby, skill -Participate in a learning activity -Math games Parents will be invited to volunteer and/or participate in evening events such as: -Trunk or Treat -Health Fair -Talent Show -STEM Family night -Student of the Month Award Presentations -Pre-K and Kindergarten orientation -Art night -Literacy night -Math Game night PTA, SLT, Parents, Supervisors, Parent Coordinator 9/18-6/19 PTA, Parent Coordinator, SLT, Supervisors Parents will be recruited through advertisement on the school website, email blasts, text blasts, fliers, and phone messages. Parents/Families, Parent Coordinator, Supervisors, PTA 9/18-6/19 PTA, Parent Coordinator, Supervisors 2018-19 CEP 30 Our Educational Networks website will be actively maintained to promote an accurate and up-to-date flow of information from the school, PTA, School Leadership Team and individual classrooms. Parents will be reminded regularly to check the website. Teachers, Supervisors, Families, Parent Coordinator 9/18-6/19 PTA, Parent Coordinator, Supervisors, Classroom Teachers, School Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources Parent coordinator PTA officers and Executive Board members Supervisors Teachers School Leadership Team Instructional Resources School website School Messenger Remind 101 Schedule Adjustments As needed by teachers to host classroom events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 31  By February 1, 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents who indicate that they have had opportunities to volunteer time to support their school as compared to the 2018 Learning Environment Survey, as evidenced by results of a brief survey compared to the results in the 2017-2018 School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey developed by the School Leadership Team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formal and informal assessment results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Reading Rescue, Soar to Success 1:1 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Formal and informal assessment results Fact Masters First In Math Implementation of UDL strategies to provide access. Implementation of UDLstrategies to provide access. Short-termcounseling Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Performance on classroom assessments. Performance on classroom assessments. Review of case submitted to the Child Study Team along with teacher recommendation and/or parent request. Small group Individualized within whole group During the school day Small group Individual Individual During the school day During the school day Small group or one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  The following services will be made available to STH students as needed:  Basic emergency supplies including but not limited to school supplies, books, eye glasses, and clothing.  Counseling services in school and/or support in finding outside counseling, if needed  Academic intervention including attendance at our morning academy 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $23,230 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n?A 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 4, the Maurice Wollin School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 CEP 39  P.S. 4, the Maurice Wollin School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; conducting parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   providing opportunities to help parents understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Guide, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  hosting the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; scheduling additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   maintaining a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school. translating all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conducting an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help   Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 40  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and on other evenings throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee;  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  providing access to Pupil Path to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  provide parents opportunities to observe and participate in their child’s classroom during Open School Week, traditionally held in the early Fall of each year;  encouraging parents to participate in classroom events and activities. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 4, the Maurice Wollin School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. P.S.4R, and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the state’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during school year 2018-2019. P.S. 4R will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Utilize research based and core curriculum to include the Orton-Gillingham program along with a balanced literacy curriculum that is aligned to the CCLS; Eureka Math, aligned to the CCLS; Passport to Social Studies, aligned to state standards; and Amplify which is aligned to the Next Generation Science standards. Technology is integrated into the classroom. Arts instruction is based on the Blueprints for Arts Education. The NYCDOE STEM Education Framework is the basis for STEM instruction. Computer Science instruction utilizes the units of study developed through the CS4 All initiative. Physical Education instruction is aligned to the New York State Physical Education Standards. Together, this selection of curricula supports a well-rounded, flowing learning environment.  Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that include a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet, as part of our promotion policy.  Provide to each parent information needed to access an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessments in Math and English Language Arts.  Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in Section 200.56 of the title I. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 41  Schedule PTC twice during each school year in December and March. Additional ongoing conferences are held as the request of parent and/or teacher. Provide parents with the following reports on child’s progress: Report cards distributed in November and March with final report cards sent home on the last day of school. Curriculum conferences with classroom teachers in early fall. Formal notification regarding possible holdover in January. Provide information necessary to access ELA, State Math, and Science scores when released. Parent/Teacher requested meetings. Access to Pupil Path to keep parents informed of their child's progress Parent/teacher reports made by phone, e-mail, notes and scheduled appointments. Maintain a school website to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Involve parents in the planning, review and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing and timely way. Involve parents in the joint development of any school-wide program plan (for SWP schools), in an organized, ongoing and timely way. As delineated above, parents have access to staff during PTC both formally and informally throughout the school year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a home language that parents can understand. If applicable, hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend. 2018-19 CEP 42 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  We as parents will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by: o making sure my child is on time and prepared every day for school; o monitoring attendance; o talking with my child about his/her activities every day; o scheduling daily homework time; o providing an environment conducive for study; o making sure that homework is completed; o monitoring the amount of screen time my children has; ● volunteering in my child’s classroom; ● participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education; ● participating in school activities on a regular basis; ● promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time. ● staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child, through email or by mail and responding as appropriate; visit the school website regularly ● serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Leadership Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups. ● reading together with my child every day; ● providing my child with a library card; ● communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility; ● respecting the cultural differences of others; ● helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior; ● being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district; ● supporting the school’s discipline policy; ● expressing high expectations and offering praise and encouragement for achievement. III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  Do homework every day and ask for help when we need to.  Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Give to our parents or the adult who is responsible for our welfare all notices and information received from school every day 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In Fall 2017, Fountas and Pinnell assessments showed that more than half of the ELLs and former ELLs in grades K-5 at PS 4 are currently performing below grade level in reading. On the 2017NYSESLAT, one of the areas of least proficiency across grades K-5 was reading. Here are the 2017 ELA scores of current 4th and 5th grade ELLs: two students scored a 1, three students scored a 2, three students scored a 3, and two newcomer students were exempted. To support and develop the reading skills of all ELLs at PS 4, Title III funds for the 2017-2018 school year were applied towards a reading intervention program before school itlizing RAZ-Plus, a Reading A-Z.com product which offers support for ELLs in reading comprehension, vocabulary, content and language skills. 2018 NYSESLAT and 2018 ELA scores were unavailable at the time that this document was revised. However, June 2018 Fountas and Pinell assessments showed that 13 of the 25 ELLs who attend the morning reading program consistently were reading at or above grade level by June 2018. It is proposed that 60% of PS 4’s Title III funds will be applied towards continuing the reading intervention program before school during the 2018-2019 school year. Again, all current and former General and Special Education ELLs in grades K-5 will be invited to participate. The program is tentatively scheduled to begin in October 2018. The program will run Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 7:29 AM to 8:14 AM. The language of instruction will be English. The teacher in charge will be the ENL teacher, who is currently appointed to PS 4 under a TESOL K-12 license. Similar to the 2017-2018 Title III program, the reading intervention program will have a technology component and a data-driven small group instruction component. The school plans to use Title III finds to renew licenses for RAZ-Plus, a Reading A-Z.com product which offers support for ELLs in reading comprehension, vocabulary, content and language skills. Each student will be provided a login, which will allow the students to work with texts on their reading level. RAZ-Plus also includes online assessments of student progress, which the ENL teacher will use to inform small group instruction. The materials and assessments available through RAZ-Plus are aligned to Common Core state standards. For the small group instruction component, the ENL teacher will use data from the online assessments to form flexible guided reading groupings. Additionally, during small group instruction, the ENL teacher will use the Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory approach to literacy in order to target and address gaps. The ENL teacher will be responsible for taking daily attendance and maintaining records of select student work. The ENL teacher will provide information in the parents’ preferred languages. 20% of the Title III funds will be applied towards OTPS, which will include purchasing RAZ-Plus licenses and headphones for the students to use with the online program. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 10 % of the Title III funds will be applied towards professional development. Participation in ongoing professional development related to curriculum, instruction and assessment of all students including ELLs will ensure that the Title III ENL teacher and other staff who work with the ELL population at PS 4 will positively impact the progress of ELL students. The ENL teacher will participate in all in-house PD workshops provided by our administrators, coach, and any other qualified teachers or specialists. The ENL teacher will also participate in PD sessions offered by the Borough Field Support Center. The ENL teacher will maintain a record of her attendance in all PD activities which will be kept in a binder in her classroom. Mariel Covino, the ENL teacher, may provide PD to staff that is involved with the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs on a monthly basis. PD sessions will take place during Monday pd time, 2:35 - 3:55. A tentative schedule of PD topics follows: October: Facilitating communication with parents who are not fluent in English December: Collaboration and co-teaching strategies for ELLs February: Developing content and language objectives in lesson planning April: Effective strategies for vocabulary development June: Oral language development with thinking routines Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 10% of the Title III funds will be applied towards parental engagement activities. The ENL teacher will conduct a needs analysis survey among the ELL parents in their preferred languages, which will inform parent workshop topics. All current and former ELL parents will receive notification about upcoming workshops in their preferred languages through notices, phone calls and email. All notification will be conducted in the parents’ preferred languages, as indicated on the HLIS forms and the RAPL report on ATS. We will continue to utilize he services of our bilingual parent volunteers and school staff to assist in translation and interpretation related to parental engagement workshops, as well as the DOE language access resources such as Language Line and T&I Unit. Once the needs analysis survey is conducted, the Title III ENL teacher will plan a workshop schedule and select topics to be covered. Workshops will be presented by one of the licensed ENL teachers on staff. One-hour workshops will be offered 2018-19 CEP 47 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities during the school day and repeated again in the evening. A tentative schedule follows, but is subject to change based upon parent needs: November/December: Accessing RAZ-Plus at home January/February: Navigating bilingual resources on the school website and NYC DOE website March/April: Getting ready for NYS exams including NYSESLAT May/June: How to “refresh” skills over the summer vacation. Parents will sign and attendance sheet and receive an agenda in their preferred languages at the beginning of each workshop. The Title III ENL teacher will maintain the attendance records and copies of the agendas, needs surveys, invitations, hand outs, etc., in a binder that will be stored in her classroom. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Total for program. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Maurice Wollin Borough Staten Island School Number 004 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal S. DiMitri Coach L. Kozdraski ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher M. Covino Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider R. Freeman Superintendent type here Assistant Principal M. Grandner Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Sandy Zhou Parent Coordinator S. Saccomagno Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) A. Moore, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 684 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.46%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. The implication for this year's LAP is to utilize quantitative and qualitative data in order to focus instruction in the ENL program and in classrooms with ELLs towards raising performance levels in ELA and the content areas for all ELLs in grades K-5. Quantitative data used to guide instructional planning for ELLs at PS 4 include NYS exam scores in ELA, Math and Science, data stored in Skedula, and Foutas and Pinell, and Orton Gillingham data. Qualitative data used to guide instructional planning for ELLs include running records, conference notes and teacher observations. Curriculum embedded assessment data in math includes exit slips administered at the end of each math lesson in K-5, mid module assessments to determine how the students are progressing through the standards and inform future instruction, and end module assessments. Curriculum embedded assessment data in ELA includes formative assessments of students' progression through the standards at the end of each bend in ELA instruction in grades K-5. 2018-19 CEP 50  Quantitative and qualitative data garnered from state exams, Skedule, Fountas and Pinell, Orton Gillingham, curriculum embedded assessments, running records, conference notes, and teacher observations as described above are used by the ENL teachers to inform both integrated and standalone instruction, plan flexible groupings (ex: guided reading groups), identify the individual early literacy skills in need of improvement for each student and target interventions for at-risk ELLs. Progress monitoring by the ENL and classroom teachers is an on-going process, documenting strategies and interventions utilized and their effects on student performance. Data is shared among the administration and colleagues at conferences as a means to inform the school’s instructional plan. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that we have in place to support this effort include administering exit slips at the end of each math lesson in K-5, and mid/end module assessments which can be used to inform future instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Baselines are not used for math. Qualitative data collected by the ENL and classroom teachers such as conference notes and teacher observations, NYS exam scores, curriculum embedded assessments and benchmark assessments include Fountas and Pinell and Orton Gillingham are used to identify progress and areas of need. Areas of need across all grade levels include reading comprehension and basic math skills such as place value and computation, as indicated by the assessment tools described above. Data obtained from the sources described above demonstrate that the ELLs are best supported in making progress towards the standards when the ENL and classroom teachers collaborate and co-teach to ensure that language and content objectives are met. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures we have in place to address interventions include RtI, ELL Morning Academy, Soar to Success and Orton Gillingham. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RtI at PS 4 includes academic intervention programs such as Verbalizing and Visualizing, Soar to Success, Leveled Literacy Instruction, and Orton Gillingham. The ENL Teacher participates in all training sessions for teachers who use these interventions. Data is utilized by the ENL and classroom teachers to plan and implement appropriate targeted intervention during ENL services. This school year, the ENL Teachers implement the Soar to Success and Orton Gillingham programs during standalone and integrated services. ELA and English language development instruction for ELLs is provided at the Tier 1 core instructional level. Through on-going progress monitoring (running records, informal observations, periodic assessments, etc) by the ENL teachers and classroom teachers, at-risk students are identified and provided more targeted and intensive academic supports at the Tier 2 level, and Tier 3 level if necessary. For ELLs, the documentation analyzed also includes the following: a description of how instruction was differentiated to address the needs of our linguistically and culturally diverse learners, the amount and type of ENL instruction provided, and a description of the specific skills that need additional and/or more intense intervention. Data from the 2017 NYSESLAT shows that overall the ELLs have increased in proficiency since 2016. 14 students increased at least one proficiency level: 7 students scored Commanding. 1 student increased from Entering to Emerging. 2 student increased from Emerging to Transitioning. 4 students increased from Transitioning to Expanding. 6 students increased more than one proficiency level: 1 student increased from Entering to Transitioning, 2 students increased from Entering to Expanding, and 3 student increased from Emerging to Expanding. 9 student remained at the Expanding level, but most showed an increase in total raw score in that range from 2016 to 2017. 2 2018-19 CEP 51  students remained at the Transitioning proficiency level, and 1 newcomer remained at the Entering level. At this time, the ENL teachers only have access to the NYS ELA and NYS Math scores of the current 4th and 5th grade ELLs at PS 4. On the 2017 ELA, 2 of this year's current 4th grade ELLs scored a 2 on the ELA and 2 of this years current 4th grade ELLs scored a 3 on the ELA. One newcomer student was exempted from the Grade 4 2017 NYS ELA. 2 students scored a 2 on the Grade 4 2017 NYS Math, 2 students scored a 3, an one student scored a 4. An analysis of the current 5th graders' scores on the 2016-2017 NYS ELA and 2016-2017 NYS Math indicate the following: 2 students remained at a level 1 on the ELA exam in 20176 and 2017. One of these students was in a self contained class in 2015-2016 and 2016-2017, and the other student was in a bilingual program in Brooklyn in 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 and just transferred to PS 4 this September. One student increased from a 1 to a 2 on the 2017 ELA, and one student increased from a 1 to a 3 on the 2017 ELA. 2 newcomer students were exempted from the ELA. Of those two students one scored a 1 on the 2017 Math (he is a SIFE student), and one scored a 4 on the 2017 Math. One student increased from a 3 to a 4 on the Math, and one student increased from a 2 to a 3 on the 2017 NYS Math. The transfer student from the bilingual school in Brooklyn dropped from a 2 to a 1 on the 2017 Math. The ELL in the self contained class remained at a level 1 on the 2017 NYS Math. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT as indicated on the RLAT report reveal that the majority of our ELLs across all grades scored at an overall level of Expanding English proficiency. 7 ELLs scored Commanding, 18 ELLs scored Expanding, 6 ELLs scored Transitioning, 2 ELLs scored Emerging, and 1 ELL scored Entering. 13 new students were administered the NYSITELL in September 2017. 3 scored at Entering, 4 scored at Transitioning, and 6 scored at Expanding. Data from the 2017 NYSESLAT on the current RLAT shows that overall the ELLs have increased in proficiency since 2016. 14 students increased at least one proficiency level: 7 students scored Commanding. 1 student increased from Entering to Emerging. 2 student increased from Emerging to Transitioning. 4 students increased from Transitioning to Expanding. 6 students increased more than one proficiency level: 1 student increased from Entering to Transitioning, 2 students increased from Entering to Expanding, and 3 student increased from Emerging to Expanding. 9 student remained at the Expanding level, but most showed an increase in total raw score in that range from 2016 to 2017. 2 students remained at the Transitioning proficiency level, and 1 newcomer remained at the Entering level. At this time, the ENL teachers only have access to the NYS ELA and NYS Math scores of the current 4th and 5th grade ELLs at PS 4. On the 2017 ELA, 2 of this year's current 4th grade ELLs scored a 2 on the ELA and 2 of this years current 4th grade ELLs scored a 3 on the ELA. One newcomer student was exempted from the Grade 4 2017 NYS ELA. 2 students scored a 2 on the Grade 4 2017 NYS Math, 2 students scored a 3, an one student scored a 4. An analysis of the current 5th graders' scores on the 2016-2017 NYS ELA and 2016-2017 NYS Math indicate the following: 2 students remained at a level 1 on the ELA exam in 20176 and 2017. One of these students was in a self contained class in 2015-2016 and 2016-2017, and the other student was in a bilingual program in Brooklyn in 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 and just transferred to PS 4 this September. One student increased from a 1 to a 2 on the 2017 ELA, and one student increased from a 1 to a 3 on the 2017 ELA. 2 newcomer students were exempted from the ELA. Of those two students one scored a 1 on the 2017 Math (he is a SIFE student), and one scored a 4 on the 2017 Math. One student increased from a 3 to a 4 on the Math, and one student increased from a 2 to a 3 on the 2017 NYS Math. The transfer student from the bilingual school in Brooklyn dropped from a 2 to a 1 on the 2017 Math. The ELL in the self contained class remained at a level 1 on the 2017 NYS Math. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures that we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to programs at PS 4 include the PD team, which plans and implements PD for all staff every Monday and on conference days for staff development, and Professional Learning Groups for all grade levels , which is comprised of all classroom teachers and an 2018-19 CEP 52  administrator. Professional learning Group meetings are built into the school wide prep schedule to ensure that every group meets once a week to discuss curriculum, planning, quantitative/qualitative data, and summative/formative assessment. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELLs are serviced through both Standalone and Integrated services in order to ensure that students receive the full amount of their NYS CR Part 154 mandated number of units of service of integrated and standalone (standalone when mandated for Entering and Emerging ELLs and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) support as determined by individual proficiency level according to to the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY. All ELLs on a grade have been placed in the same class to ensure consistency in the planning and implementation of Integrated ENL services. The ENL Teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers during common prep time at least once per week in order to plan and implement instruction during scheduled Integrated periods. For Standalone services, students may be grouped heterogeneously by grade or within a two grade span. Data from the RLAT is analyzed to determine the proficiency level of each student and the mandated number of units of service required for each student as per CR Part 154 for each proficiency level. Once this is determined, the ENL schedules are created, ensuring that all ELLs receive the full amount of NYS CR Part 154mandated number of units of service if integrated and standalone (standalone when mandated for Entering and Emerging ELLs and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) support per week as determined by individual proficiency level according to each student's score on the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY. This is how the standalone model is implemented: students who score at the Entering and Emerging levels on the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY (and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) are programmed into ENL schedules to receive 180 minutes of standalone services per week as per CR Part 154 (Transitioning = up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154). Students are grouped across a 2 grade span and perform at mixed proficiency levels (EN/EM/TR). This is how the integrated model is implemented: students who score at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of the 2017 or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY are programmed into the ENL schedules to receive 180 minutes of integrated services per week as per CR Part 154 (or 90 minutes for Transitioning ELLs who are receiving 90 minutes of standalone per week as per CR Part 154). ELLs who scored Commanding on the 2016 or 2017 NYSESLAT continue to receive 90 minutes of integrated services per week as per CR Part 154. All ELLs on a grade have been placed in the same class to ensure consistency in the planning and implementation of integrated ENL services. Students of mixed proficiency levels (EN/EM/TR/EX/CM) on each grade are placed in the same class. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. 2018-19 CEP 53  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed for the mandated number of instructional minutes of ELL services (Integrated and Standalone) based upon results on the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY. All ELA work done at PS 4 is presented in the workshop model using a comprehensive literacy approach for instruction. This will comprise the explicit ELA instruction for ELLs. Materials in the students' native languages such as bilingual books, dictionaries, content area glossaries, and Lakeshore Photo Card Libraries with captions in English and 14 other languages are utilized in the ENL classroom. Additionally, use of native language (oral/written) may be encouraged between students and bilingual teachers/staff, “bilingual buddy” relationships may be established, and inclusive cultural events may be celebrated school-wide. Our ELLs are serviced through both Standalone and Integrated services in order to ensure that students receive the full amount of their NYS CR Part 154 mandated number of units of service of integrated and standalone (standalone when mandated for Entering and Emerging ELLs and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) support as determined by individual proficiency level according to to the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY. All ELLs on a grade have been placed in the same class to ensure consistency in the planning and implementation of Integrated ENL services. The ENL Teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers during common prep time at least once per week in order to plan and implement instruction during scheduled Integrated periods. For Standalone services, students may be grouped heterogeneously by grade or within a two grade span. Data from the RLAT is analyzed to determine the proficiency level of each student and the mandated number of units of service required for each student as per CR Part 154 for each proficiency level. Once this is determined, the ENL schedules are created, ensuring that all ELLs receive the full amount of NYS CR Part 154mandated number of units of service if integrated and standalone (standalone when mandated for Entering and Emerging ELLs and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) support per week as determined by individual proficiency level according to each student's score on the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY. This is how the standalone model is implemented: students who score at the Entering and Emerging levels on the 2017 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY (and Transitioning ELLs for up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154) are programmed into ENL schedules to receive 180 minutes of standalone services per week as per CR Part 154 (Transitioning = up to 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154). Students are grouped across a 2 grade span and perform at mixed proficiency levels (EN/EM/TR). This is how the integrated model is implemented: students who score at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of the 2017 or NYSITELL for newcomers in the 2017-2018 SY are programmed into the ENL schedules to receive 180 minutes of integrated services per week as per CR Part 154 (or 90 minutes for Transitioning ELLs who are receiving 90 minutes of standalone per week as per CR Part 154). ELLs who scored Commanding on the 2016 or 2017 NYSESLAT continue to receive 90 minutes of integrated services per week as per CR Part 154. All ELLs on a grade have been placed in the same class to ensure consistency in the planning and implementation of integrated ENL services. Students of mixed proficiency levels (EN/EM/TR/EX/CM) on each grade are placed in the same class. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches 2018-19 CEP 54  alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The full time ENL teacher is state licensed in TESOL K-12 instruction. In addition, she is certified in Early Childhood and Elementary Education by New York State. The part time ENL teacher is licensed in Common Branch and hols a current certificate in TESOL K-12. The ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers to plan and implement content are and language instruction that integrates ENL methodologies in the classroom during Integrated services. The ENL teachers also continue to utilize an extensive, leveled ESL library from Rigby: On Our Way to English, a collection which includes texts for Guided Reading, periodic assessments, and teacher guides. The current ENL instructional program incorporates the use of SIOP and scaffolding in the content areas, differentiation strategies, TPR, hands-on activities, manipulatives, pictures, music and movement, and employs a broad range of ESL and literacy strategies to support the ELL students. ELL students are provided frequent access to online educational websites and interactive language learning software on the SmartBoard and desktop computers. Classroom teachers collaborate with the ENL teachers to analyze the Common Core Learning Standards during unit – and lesson- planning to ensure that content presented in the English language is differentiated and made comprehensible to current and former ELLs through scaffolding, appropriate application of ENL language learning methods, and research-based ENL strategies, such as those described above, so that all ELLs may meet the demands of the CCLS. The ENL program includes the Standalone component that has been implemented to ensure that Entering and Emerging level students receive the necessary linguistic support during instruction. Additionally, the ENL Teachers collaborate with the AIS teachers and related service providers who service ELLs to ensure that appropriate strategies, methods, and approaches are utilized in the ENL program and other academic programs in which ELLs participate. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers review data from exit slips, mid/end module assessments, Fountas and Pinell, Orton Gillingham, reading/writing conference notes, speaking/listening task notes during lesson planning in order to prepare and deliver instruction that will best support the academic and linguistic needs of all students. The ENL and classroom teachers routinely engage in inquiry work to look at ELL performance on standards-based classroom tasks such as described above to drive instruction towards making language and content comprehensible for ELLs as they progress through the standards of the Common Core. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who are Spanish dominant and do not score proficient on the NYSITELL are administered the Spanish LAB. At the present time, PS 4 does not have sufficient numbers in order to sustain a TBE or DL class. However, in the event that the school should open a TBE or DL program, native language assessments such as EL SOL, ELE Spanish Reading Test, or Chinese Reading Test or other research-based, formal assessments in the language of instruction in the TBE or DL program other than English will be utilized to appropriately evaluate students in their native language(s). Measures to evaluate a student's comprehension after a lesson if the LL is at the Entering or Emerging level or is a newcomer 2018-19 CEP 55  may be differentiated and will vary depending upon the objectives of the lesson. Evaluation tools may be translated for students, or the students may respond in their home language to evaluate comprehension. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all ELL subgroups: a. We are currently not servicing one SIFE student. The student came to PS 4 in Fall 2016. The student speaks the same home language as Staten Island's Director of ELLs, so the Director of ELLs cam to PS 4 in Fall 2016 to administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and review the guidance documents with us. b. Newcomers receive targeted, differentiated instruction in the four modalities through Integrated and Standalone services, as well as benefit from collaboration among the ESL Teachers, classroom teachers, AIS teachers, and related service providers to ensure that the academic, linguistic, and other special needs are addressed. Native language suport and resources are provided. Newcomers who are in the testing grades receive additional academic and linguistic support through participation intervention services available at the school such as the Leveled Literacy program and AIS. Newcomers in testing grades will also receive the testing accommodations mandated for ELLs by New York State, which will also be extended to former ELLs for up to two years after scoring proficient on the NYSESLAT. Parent meetings of current and former ELLs in the testing grades will also be conducted in the parents’ languages of choice to ensure that parents are aware of the testing requirements and to address their questions and concerns. Since NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, ELLs in this subgroup will receive additional services based upon his or her academic and linguistic needs, such as participation in an AIS program, participation in related service(s), participation in the Leveled Literacy program, parent support workshops or other available support services. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. c. Developing ELLs will receive targeted instruction in the area(s) of least proficeincy as determined by the NYSESLAT, other NYS exams, and classroom assessments. The ESL teachers and classroom teachers work in collaboration with the AIS teachers and related service providers to improve ELL progress in reading and writing by developing individual goals for each of these students based on analysis of performance on the NYSESLAT and classroom performance. Both the ESL teachers and classroom teachers provide differentiated instruction designed to enable each student to achieve individual goals related to academics, language, and other special needs. Native language support and resources are also utilized. Additional services a provided based on an individual-needs basis, including AIS. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. d. We are currently not servicing any Long Term ELL students. In the event that we need to service a LTE student, the student will be provided with the required amount of ESL instructional minutes based upon proficiency level as determined by the NYSESLAT in addition to any other intervention services found necessary. Services may include Academic Intervention 2018-19 CEP 56  Services, parent support workshops or other available support services. Native language support and resources will also be utilized. Additionally, the ESL teacher, classroom teachers, related service provider(s) and AIS teachers would collaborate to ensure that the academic and language learning needs, as well as other special needs, of all LTE students are addressed. e. Former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status as determined by NYSESLAT score are placed in the same class as other ELL student so that the former ELLs may continue to receive the support of an ENL teacher during integrated services for 90 minutes per week as mandated by CR Part 154. ENL and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach to ensure that former ELLs acheive both language and content objectives. Former ELLs may participate in one or more intervention program or service, such as SETTS, LLI, Soar to Success, Verbalizing and Visualizing, and/or Orton Gillingham. Native language support and resources are also provided. Former ELLs in the testing grades receive a two-year extension of testing accommodations. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs who have been identified as having special needs have been placed in accordance with his/her IEP, which indicates specific ENL instruction in addition to any special education services needed. ENL instruction is differentiated in order to meet the special needs of individual students as indicated on the IEP, increase academic achievement, and support language acquisition. When possible, the ENL teacher integrates strategies into instruction to support the needs of the students as suggested by related service providers (ex: OT recommendation to use slant board and pencil grip during writing, PT suggestion to take movement breaks during long reading tasks). Paraprofessionals assigned to Special Education ELLs may accompany their students during standalone ENL services. Additionally, the ENL teachers, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, and AIS teachers collaborate to ensure that the academic and language learning needs of all ELL-SWD students are addressed, as well as other special needs. Additional services to which ELL-SWDs are entitled include participation in the AIS program, inclusion in the Leveled Literacy program, participation in related service(s), parent support workshops, native language support and resources, and/or other available support services. Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts, such as the Math in Focus curriculum and Verbalizing and Visualizing. Daily academic content area instruction in the classroom is differentiated according to ability and incorporates the use of research-based academic and language learning strategies that have been found to be successful with ELLs with special needs, as well as scaffolding techniques, manipulatives, visuals, realia, hands-on activities, TPR, and music and movement to facilitate the acquisition of language and content area knowledge. The ENL Teachers and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs collaborate to ensure that research-based ENL language learning strategies are integrated into each lesson to support student achievement of both academic and linguistic goals. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 4 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse academic and linguistic needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment according to the requirements indicated on the most current IEP of each child. The ELL-SWDs whose IEPs require a paraprofessional are 2018-19 CEP 57  assigned a paraprofessional in the classroom. Additionally, paraprofessionals may accompany the ELL-SWDs to whom they are assigned to Standalone ESL services. All Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts. The ESL Teachers, Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals, AIS teachers, related service provider(s) and coach collaborate to ensure that all ELL-SWDs are able to achieve curricular goals through support provided through scaffolded instruction that incorporates ESL teaching methods, differentiated learning strategies and other research-based instructional practices that have been proven to be successful in making content comprehensible and further supporting English language acquisition for ELL-SWDs. Scheduling flexibility in the ESL program allows for the ESL Teacher to provide Integrated services during content area studies as well as literacy instruction. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-plan and co-teach during integrated service periods to to ensure that ELLs achieve both language and content objectives. Co-teaching models vary depending upon the objectives of each lesson, but may be any of the following: parallel teaching, 2 teachers teach same content to one group, 2 teachers teach same content to 2 groups, one teach one assess, one pre teaches one teaches alternative information, or 2 teachers monitor and teach multiple groups. PS 4 now departmentalizes the subject areas in grades 3-5 for all General Education and Special Education classes including ICT and ASD classes. In general education classes, one teacher teaches ELA/Social Studies, and one teacher teaches Math/Science. In ICT and ASD classes, one general education teacher and one special education teacher are responsible for teaching ELA/Social Studies, and another general education and special education teacher are responsible for teaching math/science. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs in ANY of the subgroups who are struggling in ELA and math may receive targeted intervention through a variety of programs based upon the academic needs of the individual student. Programs offered at PS 4 include Visualizing and Verbalizing, Orton-Gillingham, and SETTS. All services are offered English. Additionally, the full time ENL teacher runs and ELL Academic Academy before school which is open to any current or former ELL who wishes to participate. In the morning academy, ELLs are grouped according to needs as determined by the ENL teacher and receive targeted intervention through instruction in leveled literacy and/or Orton Gillingham. All services are provided in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A part-time ENL teacher was hired to provide a portion of integrated and standalone services. The part time ENL teacher has been programmed to teach 10 periods of ENL per week, and will be providing the required mandated units of integrated/standalone service for kindergarten ELLs in full. She will provide half of the required mandated units of integrated/standalone service for Grade 1 ELLs, and the full time ENL teacher will provide the other half of mandated integrated/standalone service for Grade 1 ELLs. The part time ENL teacher has been assigned to provide 180 minutes of integrated service per week to ELLs in kindergarten, 90 minutes of integrated service per week to ELLs in Grade 1, and 180 minutes of standalone service per week to Entering/Emerging ELLs in K and 1. This teacher services 8 kindergarten ELLs and 8 Grade 1 ELLs. Again, all ELLs on a grade are placed in the same class. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs and former ELLs may participate in all before- and after-school programs and supplemental services, including Extended Day, Leveled Literacy SETTS/AIS programs, V &V, Soar to Success, and Orton. The full time ENL teacher runs and ELL Academic Academy before school which is open to any current or former ELL who wishes to participate. In the morning academy, ELLs are grouped according to needs as determined by the ENL teacher and receive targeted intervention through instruction in leveled literacy and/or Orton Gillingham. All services are provided in English. 2018-19 CEP 58  To the fullest extent possible, school bulletins, DOE notices and permission forms, including those that pertain to school programs, and report cards are distributed in English as well as the native languages of our ELL families, which ensures that equal access to all school programs is afforded to our ELLs and that their full participation in such school programs is encouraged and supported by all school staff. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The current ENL instructional program incorporates the use of SIOP model and scaffolding in the content areas, differentiation strategies, TPR, hands-on activities, manipulatives, pictures, music and movement, frequent access to online educational websites and interactive language learning software, and employs a broad range of ESL and literacy strategies to support the ELL students. In an effort to raise performance levels in reading across all grades, the ESL program continues to incorporate the use of the extensive, leveled ESL library from Rigby: On Our Way to English. The collection includes texts for Guided Reading, periodic assessments, and teacher guides. The Rigby resources complement Avenues, the ESL curriculum that is currently in place. The ESL classroom has a Smart Board and two desktop computers. Each classroom also has one iPad intended for student use. PS 4 intends to increase the use of technology in its ESL program through the use of interactive software designed to improve the language and literacy skills of ELLs. The use of the leveled library and Smart Board, combined with the use of the instructional materials already in place from previous years, will benefit our ELLs across all subgroups, as the materials provide for scaffolded and differentiated instruction to meet the needs of all learners. In addition to bilingual books, bilingual dictionaries and bilingual content area glossaries, ELL support in the native languages is provided through the use of other materials such as Lakeshore Photo Card Libraries with captions in English and 14 other languages and access to a wide range of online resources in the native languages of our students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The two highest incidence languages at PS 4 are Mandarin adn Arabic. 20 ELL families speak Mandarin and 12 ELL families speak Arabic. We have between 1-3 families each that speak Russian, Urdu, Lithuanian, Sinhalese, Tagalog and Hungarian. This is how we support these students and their families: Materials in the students' native languages such as bilingual books, dictionaries, content area glossaries, and Lakeshore Photo Card Libraries with captions in English and 14 other languages are utilized in the ENL classroom. Students also have access to a variety of online resources in the native languages of our students. These resources are integrated into the ENL program in order to provide the 25% of mandated Native Language support. Additionally, students may be encouraged to use the native language when necessary, establish “bilingual buddy” relationships with peers and school staff, and attend cultural events at the school. This is also how we support these students and their families: To the fullest extent possible, school bulletins, DOE notices and permission forms, including those that pertain to school programs, and report cards are distributed in English as well as the native languages of our ELL families, which ensures that equal access to all school programs is afforded to our ELLs and that their full participation in such school programs is encouraged and supported by all school staff. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Teachers who provide intervention services (SETTS, LLI, Speech, OT, PT, Counseling) to ELLs consult the ENL teachers to ensure that all services and resources are appropriate for each student's individual age, grade levels, and language learning needs. When appropriate, instruction is differentiated and resources are modified to meet the needs of the learners. This is how we ensure that all required services/resources are grade and age appropriate in order to effectively supoprt ELLs: All ELLs are placed in an age-appropriate class as per NYC DOE policy, integrated services are provided to ELLs across a 2 grade span, and all ELLs are provided resources (for example, workbooks and textbooks) according to the grade in which s/he has 2018-19 CEP 59  been assigned based on his/her age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. Each June, incoming Kindergarten ELLs and their families are invited to attend the annual Kindergarten Orientation, during which the AP and Parent Coordinator provide essential information to the parents about the first day of school, general procedures, program review, and expectations, among other items of importance. Families are invited to become involved with the PTA and participate in opportunties such as parent workshops. Oral and written information will be available in the parent's native language as well as English. At the orientation, parents are encouraged to ask questions and tour the Kindergarten wing of the building. The ESL Teacher and Kindergarten teachers are present to meet the incoming students and their families. Interpreters are available, and the DOE over-the-phone interpretation service may be utilized if necessary. All incoming students in grades K-5 , including ELLs, are invited to participate in the PS 4 Summer Day Camp Program, during which the children may engage in sports, arts and crafts, and other recreational activities while interacting with peers and getting to know their future teachers. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year may participate in school tour with their families and are provided access to supplemental materials that are appropriate for the child. Families are afforded opportunities to become involved with the PTA, attend parent workshops, participate, receive a program review. Oral and written information will be available in the parent's native language as well as English. The administration, Parent Coordinator, and ESL Teacher facilitate these opportunities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered at PS 4 at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 4 provides Professional Development and support for all school staff. The ENL teachers will develop personal professional development plans for this school year which will be supported by the administration. The ENL teachers will attend professional development workshops and training sessions provided by the Staten ISland Borough Field Support Center, as 2018-19 CEP 60  well as in-house PD training in instructional programs such as Leveled Literacy and Orton-Gillingham in order to integrate classroom instruction practices and methods utilized by intervention service teachers into ENL instruction. The ENL teachers will also participate in weekly professional development activities in collaboration with other teachers at the school. In addition, professional development for all personnel working with ELLs will take place during available time throughout the year including designated professional development days, monthly faculty and grade conferences, preparation periods, and after school workshops. Additionally, staff members may participate in professional development sessions presented by organizations such as NYS TESOL, NYSABE, or the Manhattan-Staten Island BETAC. Below is a tentative calendar of in-house Professional Development scheduled for the school year. PD workshops will be developed and implemented by the ENL teachers. Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, related service providers, AIS teachers, paraprofessionals, administrators, secretaries, and parent coordinator will be encouraged to attend. November - December: Incorporating ENL strategies into Instruction in the Classroom March - April: Strategies for preparing ELLs for upcoming state exams including NYS ELA, NYS Math, and NYSESLAT (Parents of ELLs will also be encouraged to attend this session) June: Strategies for assisting ELLs in maintaining progress throughout the summer break (Parents of ELLs will also be encouraged to attend this session) The ENL teachers participate in all professional development that relates to the Common Core Learning Standards, such as Math in Focus and Close Reading training sessions. The ENL teachers will continue to attend ENL workshops offered by SIBFSC that focus on CCLS as it relates to ESL instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members such as 5th grade classroom teachers and others who work with 5th grade ELL students may participate in professional development sessions held either at school or presented by organizations such as NYS TESOL, NYSABE or the Manhattan-Staten Island BETAC that focus on assisting ELLs as they transition from elementary school to middle school. Arrangements may be made to have PS 4 staff, including the ESL Teacher, accompany the Grade 5 ELLs, former ELLs, and their parents on a visit to the middle school to which the students will transition the following year, during which time the students and parents would take a tour of the building and meet the staff, including the middle school ESL Teacher. All staff will receive the required amount of ELL training through participation in Professional Development sessions with issues related to ELLs, either in-house or provided by organizations such as NYS TESOL, NYSABE or the Manhattan-Staten Island BETAC. The ESL Teacher will maintain the attendance records and PD agendas of all staff who participate in ELL training. The records will be kept in a binder in the ESL classroom. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacghers are available to provide annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program , languiage development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language developmen needs in the content areas during Parent Engagement Time every Tuesday 2:35-3:50 PM. These meeitngs are in addition to the mandated parent orientation meeting and DOE scheduled PTCs. In September, the full time ENL teacher send home a calendar of all the Tuesday dates during the school year Septmebr through June to all of the parents/guardians of all the ELLs in K-5. The accompanying letter (translated into English, 2018-19 CEP 61  Mandarin, Arabic, Russian, Lithuanian, Sinhalese, Urdu, Tagalog and Hungarian) explains that we must meet for an annual meeting to to discuss goals of the program , languiage development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language developmen needs in the content areas. In the letter parents are instructed to circle one of the dates on the calendar to select a date to meet wioth the ENL teachers. If a parent is unable to meet on a Tuesday afternoon, another time may be scheduled for a face to face meeting, or the ENL teachers can communicate with the parent by phone (utilizing Language Line if needed) or by email. The letter instructs parents to return the circled calendar to school in the child's homework folder. The full time ENL teacher collects submitted calendars and schedules each parent for their annual meeting. Prior to the meeting, the full tiem ENL teacher sends home a translated confirmation letter (see languages above) reminding parents to attedn the meeting on the day they have selected. When a parent needs interpretation assistance, Language Line is utilized or a staff member provides interpretation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Sandy Zhou is the ELL parent member of the LAP Team, and is the liason between the school and ELL parents. She advises on how PS 4 is supporting the needs of ELL parents, and workshop ideas for ELL parents. The majority of ELL parents attend the annual ELL parent meetings and DOE scheduled PTCs. The full time ENL teacher maintains attendance of these meetings and attendance records from 2016-2017 show that the ENL teacher met with 25 of 27 families. Cecilia Saccomagno is PS 4's parent Coordinator. She distributes a weekly email blast to all families describing the upcoming week’s school activities, and information about free and low-cost workshops and educational activities in the community. The ENL Teachers works closely with the Parent Coordinator to reach out to our ELL families and encourage parental involvement. Ms. Saccomagno has created an ELL Parent email list in order to keep ELL parents informed of news and upcoming events related to ELLs and education. The Parent Coordinator and ENL Teachers work together to ensure that school web pages, school bulletins, notices and permission slips are available in both English and the native languages of our families. Ms. Saccomagno and the ENL Teachers jointly conduct ELL Parent Orientation sessions as new ELLs are enrolled at PS 4. For Parent-Teacher Conferences and other school-based events in which parents are invited, the Parent Coordinator and ENL Teachers utilize parent surveys in order to arrange for bilingual staff and parent volunteers to assist with the translation and interpretation needs of our parents. If there are no volunteers who speak the language of a parent, the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted to facilitate communication between the school and ELL families. These measures ensure that the parents of ELLs will be kept abreast of all activities in which parental involvement is encouraged. Such activities include, but are not limited to, the following: attendance at parent-teacher conferences, participation in the PTA, class parent roles and responsibilities, and attendance at monthly school assemblies and other in-house activities. Common translated signs that have been downloaded from the DOE's Translation Resources website are displayed prominently in the Main Office. The full time ENL teacher maintains a binder of all DOE -produced ELL Parent Information surveys, informational documents, and notifications relevant to the ELL identification and placement process in the available translated versions. If the translation of other critical, school-issued surveys, informational documents and notifications cannot be completed in-house by a school staff member or parent volunteer, services offered by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit are utilized. The full time ENL teacher is responsible for completing and submitting Translation Request Forms to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. The full time ENL teacher aims to submit the Translation Request Forms and the file(s) to be translated to translations@schools.nyc.gov as early as possible to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents determined to be in need of language assistance services. When necessary, the school obtains translation services in additional languages via external, DOE-contracted vendors. Again, the full time ENL teacher aims to submit requests as early as possible to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents determined to be in need of language assistance services. In the event that a staff member is not available to interpret for a parent, the school utilizes Language Line Interpretation Services. If necessary, the school will apply its translation/interpretation funding allocations in order to contract The Big Word to cover interpretation needs. 2018-19 CEP 62  When interpretation services are required for on-site central events in which the parents of ELLs are participating, the full time ENL teacher is responsible for completing and submitting Interpretation Request Forms to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to translations@schools.nyc.gov. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in the PTA. All parents are invited to join the PTA and become involved in the many events that the group plans (ex: school spirit activites, art night festivities, annual holiday and plant sales, etc.). Families are also encouraged to attend Parent-Teacher conferences and Parent Coordinator workshops. During this school year, the ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator will also conduct workshops for parents of newly enrolled ELLs. Additionally, workshops on topics such as the NYSESLAT and strategies for supporting the academic success of the ELL child at home may be presented. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Suzanne Dimitri, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Maurice Wollin School DBN: 31R004 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) S. DiMitri Title Principal M. Grandner Assistant Principal C. Saccomagno Parent Coordinator M. Covino ENL/Bilingual Teacher S. Zhou L. Kozdraski A. Moore R. Freeman Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Assistant Principal Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/29/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/29/17 9/29/17 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R004 School Name: Maurice Wollin Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mariel Covino ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, all parents are administered the Home Language Identification Survey. The parent may select to complete the form in either English or the native language. The ESL teacher and Parent Coordinator are present to explain purpose of the HLIS to the parent. If necessary, school staff fluent in the parent's native language are available to assist in interpretation, or Language Line Interpretation Service may be utilized. In Section 3 of the HLIS, the parent indicates the language(s) that s/he would like to communicate both orally and in writing with school staff. The ESL teacher uses data obtained from Section 3 of the HLIS in order to pre-assess which language(s) will be needed for the current school year. The ESL teacher then updates the record of parent language preferences for all parents including non ELL parents who cannot communicate in English, which is maintained and continually updated by the ESL teachers throughout the school year. The ESL Teacher may also obtain this information from ATS reports such as RAPL (RAPL shows all parent language preferences including non ELL parents who cannot communicate in English) , emergency contact cards, and parent surveys. Primary language information is shared with the administration, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, and Pupil Accounting secretary. Classroom teachers of students whose parents have selected to communicate in another 2018-19 CEP 66  language are notified. The ESL teacher is responsible for providing translated school notices and forms, as well as arranging for any interpretation services that may be required at face-to-face meetings such as Parent Teacher Conferences and IEP meetings for all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English, including non-ELL parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese Any Cantonese Hungarian Korean Mandarin English Oneida Polish Russian Spanish Uzbek 20 26 0 1 1 0 762 0 1 6 8 1 2.42 3.15 0 .12 .12 0 92.25 0 .12 .73 .97 .12 18 19 1 1 1 6 760 1 1 8 9 1 2.18 2.3 .12 .12 .12 .73 92.01 .12 .12 .97 1.09 .12 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to Parent Teacher Conference notices November Parent Teacher Conference notices March Parent Teacher Conference notices May parents. Submit to T&I by October 1 Submit to T&I by February 1 Submit to T&I by April 1 2018-19 CEP 67  Parent Teacher Conference notices September Submit to T&I by June 1 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Teacher Conferences September November March May interpretation service(s)? Language Line or school staff Language Line or school staff Language Line or school staff Language Line or school staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, limited English proficient families will be contacted by school staff fluent in the home language or through Language Line interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator attended the 2016-2017 training provided by the Field Language Access Coordinator. The LAC will provide PD to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of CR A-663, and the resources available to meet compliance such as Language Line, Translation and Interpretation Unit, and translated school documents/templates available on the intranet. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The ENL Teacher will facilitate the fulfillment of parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, such as the display of the Welcome Poster, distribution of Parents' Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access, and use of Language ID Guide at the security desk and in the Main Office. Translation and Interpretation Unit services will be obtained to translate notices and documents. Staff will also use translated documents/templates available on the intranet. Language Line or staff fluent in the home language will assist with interpretation. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback is gathered by the School Environment Survey as well as surveys created and disseminated by the Parent Coordinator and ESL Teacher. Quality and availability of services may be improved based upon feedback offered in such surveys. Translated School Environment Surveys will be obtained for parents who are limited English proficient. Other surveys created by school staff may be submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation prior to distribution. 2018-19 CEP 69 
