2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R007 School Name: I.S. 007 ELIAS BERNSTEIN Principal: NORA DE ROSA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7 31R007 353100010007 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 1270 Huguenot Avenue, Staten Island, New York 10312 718-697-8488 Phone Number: 718-967-0809 Fax: Joseph Mennella JMennel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 Email Address: Dr. Nora De Rosa J. Caccioppoli A. Bogad G. Dalton N/A N/A N/A District Information V. Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New York 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: Vgallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 420-5657 Phone Number: (718) 420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) K. Moran FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New York 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 374-4254 Phone Number: (718) 556-8333 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Nora De Rosa J. Caccioppoli A. Bogad J. Mennella G. Dalton M. Scheiper *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  J. Durso R. Gottlieb D. Hayes C. Marinaro Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? IS 7 2018-2019 Priority Statement IS 7 will cultivate a community who honors and respects the essential need for social and emotional development and its impact on academic and personal growth. Vision IS 7 is committed to fostering an environment that supports the social and emotional development of students, while promoting students taking ownership of their learning through intellectually engaging and rigorously designed 2018-19 CEP 9  instruction. We do this by distributing leadership amongst all stakeholders with a shared belief in equity, excellence, and high expectations for all students. Mission The Mission of IS 7 is to continue to develop reflective and empowered life-long learners who possess self and social awareness, who make responsible decisions and manage relationships amongst peers, which will result in academic excellence and equity. IS 7 Instructional Focus IF the school community works in partnership with collaborative teams and continuously collects and analyzes data to ensure equitable opportunities THEN all stakeholders will be empowered to engage in an environment that promotes rigorous learning, academic excellence, assessment capable learning and ensures social/emotional development for every student. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7 is located in the Huguenot section of Staten Island and serves the communities of Eltingville, Annadale, Huguenot and part of Princess Bay. This intermediate school serves a population of approximately 1165 students from a predominately white, middle-upper class neighborhood. The school building is well-maintained, and students’ work is prominently displayed as a source of pride and achievement. According to the latest available ethnic data, 86% of students are White, 7% are Hispanic, 1% are Black, and 5% are Asian. The student body includes 1% English language learners and 17% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate continues to have around 95%. The student population is heterogeneously grouped within each grade with the exception of our Special Programming Honors Program. In general education, we have twelve sixth, seventh, and eighth grade classes, with an average of 33 students in each class. In Special Education, four self contained classes one in the sixth, seventh and eighth grades and 16 Integrated Co-Teaching classes spread amongst the three grades. I.S.7 has caring, dedicated, and well-trained teachers that continuously strive to maintain high academic standards that match integrated and rigorous academic programs. On the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 93% of the community including parents, teachers and students gave positive responses relating to rigorous instruction. Our mission is to enable staff to provide challenging instruction in a nurturing and safe environment for our students in collaboration with family values and community structure. Our strengths lie in a dedicated faculty that is driven to provide an exceptional education to our students. Their expertise can be seen through the teacher-created/ revised units of study in the content areas, as well as classroom practice (Danielson’s Rubric). Teacher teams work ardently to create and revise lessons to suit the trends of data and to address the needs of the students empower students to take ownership of their learning to foster independence. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 99% of staff gave positive responses relating to collaboration. Our instructional mission is, "We believe students will take ownership of their learning when they are intellectually engaged in rigorously designed instruction." Collaboratively, teachers work on unpacking the Common Core state standards to develop quality-driven learning targets aligned to success indicators expressed in terms of knowledge, understanding, and skills linked directly to the curriculum. As a result, students become the drivers of their own learning, while propelling the formative assessment cycle. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 81% of our students think teachers are pushing them to become better thinkers. 2018-19 CEP 10  In an effort to strengthen instruction and improve student performance, formative and summative assessments have become a focal point for our Professional Learning Cycles. The decision to strengthen assessment within the classroom was based on data collected from formal and informal observations, PPO feedback, Book Clubs, Inquiry Meetings and Common Planning sessions. In addition, we reviewed item skills analysis from the NYS ELA and Math Exams to identify areas of concern relating to student performance and then developed assessment tools to support instruction and student growth. Further, the cycles have created an active and intentional learning process that partners the teacher and the students to continuously and systematically gather evidence of learning with the express goal of improving student achievement. Overall, our long term goals are to increase the percentage of students meeting the state standards in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies by 2019 and improve overall pedagogical practice. In an effort to provide safe, interesting and professionally supervised activities for our students, IS 7 offers a wide variety of after- school programs. Some of the programs are self-sustaining, while others are funded through United Activities Unlimited, The Multi-Cultural After School Group and the NYCDOE funded CHAMPS Program. These programs include opportunities for students to enjoy reading, writing, art, basketball, football, jazz band ensemble, percussion ensemble, drama, dance, sports and games. IS 7 continues to recognize the importance of maintaining positive community relationships. Close to 70% of the parents, surveyed acknowledged they have been asked to volunteer their time in their child's school or community. Service learning actively involves our students in a wide range of experiences. Staff members, students, and parents work jointly on community-based organizations such as The Staten Island Foundation, Blue Heron Park, Westerleigh Park and Recreation Program and the Korean War Veteran’s Association. In addition, charity events help students become active members of their community by participating in events , such as the Breast Cancer Awareness Walk and Suicide Prevention Walk. I.S 7's student population continues to outperform its peers in the surrounding community intermediate schools and schools across the city on the Science, ELA and Math State Exams as measured by student performance on the 2016 State Examinations. In addition, our 2016-2017 SQR report boasts a Well-Developed quality review rating. According to the data collected in this report, we are exceeding target ranges in progress, achievement, and in closing the achievement gap. We also met the target on the environment rating. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 1% English language learners and 17% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The student population is heterogeneously grouped within each grade with the exception of our Special Programming Honors Program. In general education, we have twelve sixth, seventh, and eighth grade classes, with an average of 33 students in each class. In Special Education, four self contained classes one in the sixth, seventh and eighth grades and 16 Integrated Co-Teaching classes spread amongst the three grades. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-2018 we continued to make great progress within each subcategory of the Framework for Great Schools. The data from the Learning Environment Survey and the data collected from the NYS ELA and Math exams along with exam results from the accelerated courses offered to our 8th grade students indicates this progress. 2018-19 CEP 11  In 2018-2019 we will focus on the following elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R007 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1163 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 38 15 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 25 13 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 37.0% % Attendance Rate 29.7% % Reduced Lunch 0.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 9.3% 83.1% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 159 158 6 93.4% 7.1% 17.6% 0.6% 5.5% 1.5% 8 21% 8.1 63.9% 70% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-2018 PPO reports a Well-Developed quality review rating in areas aligned to rigorous instruction. This data illustrates that we are a school of professionals who strive to improve our instructional practices through unpacking standards across disciplines, embedding CCLS standards and shifts into curriculum maps and crafting rigorous lessons, units and activities that include multiple entry points to supports students with disabilities, ELLs, and advanced learners. 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates that the school implements high quality curriculum, aligned to the Common Core, that challenges, engages, and scaffolds experiences for all students. Moreover, 96% of teachers indicated that they had resources and tools needed to include multiple opportunities for building students knowledge through content rich curriculum. As measured by the most recent released NYS exam data (2017) 62% of our students met the standards in ELA while 59% of our students met the standards in mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, all Math instructors in grades 6-8 will implement conceptual teaching strategies in Mathematics, using structures from Algebra for All and NTN in order to deepen their conceptual understanding and prepare them for 9th grade Algebra as measured by informal observations conducted by administration and instructional leads. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Programming: Continue to develop the Math Team on each grade level utilizing the strengths of new and existing IS 7 staff in order to foster cohesive instructional planning. Paired general education and special education co-teachers will be supported with cohesive schedules that allows both parties to plan and implement strategies throughout the day. Specialized Regents Teacher: As in the previous year, one appointed teacher will prepare our three 8th grade math regents classes, using the benefits of our compacted math curriculum for these targeted students. Through the implementation of the compacted curriculum starting in grade 6, students are simultaneously prepared for the grade 8 NYS Math exam and CCLS Algebra Regents exam. Grade 7 honors teacher(s) and the 8th grade Regents teacher loop to prepare students for compacted curriculum. Planning opportunities for Grade 7 honors teacher(s) and 8th grade Regents teacher afforded during PLC. 9/18 - 11/18 -All classes (General Education, ICT, Self Contained, Honors-compacted curriculum) -Teacher Teams -Advanced 8th Grade Regents students -6,7 and 8th Grade Impact Team 4 Administrators 1 Programmers Teacher Teams All Students Regents Teacher General Education Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher UFT Teacher Center Teacher Guidance Dept. 2018-19 CEP 16  Administrators Programmers Teacher Teams All Students Regents Teacher General Education Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher UFT Teacher Center Teacher Guidance Dept 9/18- 6/19 -All classes (General Education, ICT, Self Contained, Honors-compacted curriculum) -Teacher Teams -Advanced 8th Grade Regents students -6,7 and 8th Grade Impact Team Common Planning: On a daily basis, math teacher teams common plan to assess formative data and design coherent instruction, reflecting the knowledge of both the content and the students in the class. Through reflection, a well-designed instructional plan, specifically the implementation of vertical planning, and a compacted mathematics curriculum, addresses learning needs of diverse learners. The units of study designed are aligned to key essential and guiding questions that relate to real-world applications. Curriculum Mapping: PLC time is allotted to teacher teams for designing and improving upon curriculum maps, inclusive of enduring understanding, standards, learning targets, skills and knowledge, essential questions and assessments in alignment with the unit of study. PLC Time Dedicated to Vertical Planning: Grade level teams have designed maps that both unpack grade level standards and indicate vertical progression from the prior grade levels and future grade learning. This vertical progression allows for differentiation that enables teachers to appropriately support struggling learners at or below grade level (skills and standards intentionally targeting gaps in alignment with grade level standards) and challenge advanced learners in their classrooms (by providing access to future grade learning). iReady – online, needs-based math support and enrichment resource. Student’s complete periodic diagnostic 2018-19 CEP 17  assessments to determine needs and appropriate grade level support within four math domains with a target on the most deficient domain first. Intended use of the program is to help close achievement gap and provide enrichment. The diagnostic assessment determines current grade level (as low as grade K) and generates an appropriate pathway to bring students to current grade level within each domain. Teachers analyze individual student data to monitor growth and determine whether additional interventions are needed. Teachers use data to differentiate instruction (have the ability to assign specific standards-based lessons to students) and determine mastery of standards. Grade team teachers look for trends across the grade level. Data Driven Classroom (DDC) – Grade team teachers create common standards-aligned assessments and input/scan student responses into DDC. DDC generates reports that indicate individual student data by standard, error analysis, and item skills analysis. Grade team teachers collaborate to look for trends in the data and determine how instruction can be modified to support individual students in closing their achievement gap. Teacher reflection on practices based on the data from common assessments also informs modifications to future implementation of the particular unit of study. Grade 6, 7 and 8 Impact Team In addition to daily common planning sessions, and the PLC model described, the 7th grade math team will work as part of an impact team model (ITM) focused on improving student achievement. This team will engage in work that combines two existing practices: formative assessment and collaborative inquiry. In partnering together, the teacher team will use 2018-19 CEP 18  student work as the vehicle that will allow a stronger understanding of their impact on student learning and that allows teachers to continuously strengthen their expertise. The team will utilize vertically aligned standards to provide remediation and enrichment as needed based on the student work that has been analyzed. Through this work the team will foster a classroom culture in which teachers and students are partners in learning. The ITM will increase student achievement by supporting all learners as they take ownership of their learning. Professional Development: Provide Ongoing Professional Development to all members of the Math Department via PLC, UFT Teacher Center, BFSC, and other outside services. Professional Learning Cycle (PLC): Through a lens of formative and summative assessment, teachers learn about and share best practices using research-based strategies and theories. These practices are then implemented in the classroom. After reflecting and revising these practices, the cycle begins again using new data gathered during the previous cycle Impact Team: BFSC Impact Team members will turnkey and apply learning from borough meetings hosted by Core Collaborative. Academic Support: Targeted students who are struggling to meet the standards, receive math test prep, (RTI) response to intervention services, along with ongoing small / guided groups within their regular classes. Implementation of compacted curriculum for honors students will support their expedited progression -All classes (General Education, ICT, Self Contained, Honors-compacted curriculum) -Teacher Teams 11/18- 4/19 Administrators Programmers Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 19 All Students Regents Teacher General Education Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher UFT Teacher Center Teacher Guidance Dept. Administrators Programmers Teacher Teams All Students Regents Teacher General Education Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher UFT Teacher Center Teacher Guidance Dept. through the grade levels. Use of iReady for individualized instruction based on needs assessment. Use of data from DDC to identify gaps in understanding and target specific needs for individual students. -Advanced 8th Grade Regents students -6,7 and 8th Grade Impact Team 9/18- 6/19 -All classes (General Education, ICT, Self Contained, Honors-compacted curriculum) -Teacher Teams -Advanced 8th Grade Regents students -6,7 and 8th Grade Impact Team NTN and Algebra for All Professional Development and Coaching Support Professional Development and Coaching Support provided by NTN that focuses on aligning curriculum to the standards for Mathematical Practice and developing tasks and daily lessons that foster the students conceptual understanding. On a monthly basis the Math Department will attend the full day PD sessions and then work as grade teams to incorporate the strategies into their daily lesson plans and unit studies. Algebra For All Teachers will continue to attend A4A grade Professional Developments and Turn Key the conceptual understanding strategies to their grade teams. They will also continue to fund a Summer Program which includes a three week course for future 8th grade students to enrich and further develop Algebraic Concepts in preparation for their upcoming 9th grade Common Core Algebra Regents Class. 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Students are expected to complete 45 minutes of iReady per week. We encourage families to utilize other sources, including, but limited to LearnZillion.com, KhanAcademy.com, and EngageNY.org as a supplement if/when students are in need of additional guidance specific to the standard addressed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators Programmers Teacher Teams Regents Teacher General Education Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher UFT Teacher Center Teacher Impact Teams Guidance Department Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, most Math instructors in grades 6-8 will implement conceptual teaching strategies in Mathematics to use structures from Algebra for All and NTN in order to deepen their conceptual understanding and prepare them for 9th grade Algebra as measured by informal observations conducted by administration and instructional leads. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measurement will consist of various standards-aligned assessments, including but not limited to in-class unit exams and iReady diagnostic and standard mastery assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 2017-18 School Quality Guide (Teacher Portion), measured that 98% of the teachers feel safe at I.S.7. Also the data revealed that 100% of the staff either strongly agreed or agreed that order and discipline are maintained. 2017-18 School Quality Guide (Student Portion), measured that 95% of the students feel safe in their classes. Also 98% of the students said that there are clear consequences for breaking the rules. 2017-18 School Quality Guide (Student Portion) measured that 69% of the students had a positive response in respect to a series of questions relating to Preventing Bullying. 54% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. (Q8a) 74% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of their race, religion, ethnicity, national origin, or citizenship/immigration status at their school. (Q8b) 81% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of their gender, gender identity, gender expression, or sexual orientation at their school. (Q8c) 65% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of other differences, like disability or weight, at their school. (Q8d) 54% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. (Q8a) 74% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of their race, religion, ethnicity, national origin, or citizenship/immigration status at their school. (Q8b) 2018-19 CEP 23  81% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of their gender, gender identity, gender expression, or sexual orientation at their school. (Q8c) 65% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate each other because of other differences, like disability or weight, at their school. (Q8d) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have an overall 3% increase in the percentage of students who share a positive response on the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide in the subsection of Supportive Environment. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Guidance Counselors, Grade Deans, Grade Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parents and Students Comfort Dog Program. Social Emotional Learning Team Model Cafeteria School: This year, we are viewing the entire process of “lunch time” with a new lens. In collaboration with the students, we are working together to make the lunch not just a time to eat, but an experience for students to socialize, further support their academics and, of course, have fun. This process is forcing us to think outside the box. We are constantly observing the newly implemented items from the student lunch panel survey and incorporating feedback from the student body to enhance the students' lunch period. All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Grade Students and Staff We are tailoring our 6 th , 7 th and 8 th Grade cafeteria periods based on student interest. The “Viking Lunch Panel” consists of 6, 7 and 8 grade students. They meet twice a month. After consulting with their peers, the Viking panel members bring back the ideas and suggestions of the I.S.7 student body. The panel discusses possible ideas that can be implemented during the cafeteria periods. Age appropriate music is played from an Internet station through the cafeteria sound system while the students eat. This year, our library will be more accessible to students during the cafeteria time. We have increased the number of times that all three grades have access to utilize the library. Math, Science, Social Studies, and ELA teachers are volunteering their time to conduct 1:1 and small group tutoring sessions during the lunch period. During the holiday season and throughout the course of the school year, the Arts and Technology Department will schedule time for students to perform for their peers. We are holding co-ed basketball, football and softball sport tournaments in the eighth grade. 2018-19 CEP 25  Student Empowerment: On a daily basis, grade assistant principals, grade deans, and grade guidance counselors reinforce the Social Emotional Learning curriculum provided within the classrooms. All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Throughout the year, the grade assistant principals and grade guidance counselors will hold interactive assemblies to reinforce “The Leader in Me” philosophy. Videos, discussions and power point presentations will act to spotlight positive peer relations Grade Students and Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Guidance Counselors, Grade Deans, Grade Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parents and Students Comfort Dog Program. Social Emotional Learning Team Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Deans, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parents, and NYPD School Safety Agents, 123 pct. NCO Sector B Officers School Safety Meeting / School Climate Meeting: This monthly meeting provides an opportunity for school personnel to meet and discuss the safety/security of the building. This meeting is a platform for staff to discuss best practices regarding disciplinary interventions, safety protocols and strategies. Each month, an OORs location and infraction report is generated which gives a clear picture of the building’s disciplinary data. After the monthly report is disaggregated, the Safety Committee works to target areas of need. They construct an alternate game plan to provide the appropriate intervention that is necessary for improvement. September 2018-June 2019 All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Grade Students and Staff The School Climate Meetings discusses best practices on disciplinary issues and grade organizational topics. The purpose of the meeting is to vertically align and calibrate the school's grade cabinets in protocols and grade procedures. Respect for All Model: In alignment with Chancellors Regulations A-832,A-830, A-443, A-420, A-421, I.S.7 follows the Respect for All model which provides a safe and supportive learning environment that is free from harassment, intimidation and/or bullying and from discrimination on account of actual or perceived race, color, citizenship/immigration status, religion, creed, national origin, disability, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation or weight. Peer Mediation Program: Sixth, Seventh and Eighth grade guidance counselors and deans will train students to become Peer Mediators. The Mediators will September 2018-June 2019 All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Grade Students and Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Deans, Grade Guidance Counselors, Respect for All Point Person, UFT Representatives CSA Representatives 2018-19 CEP 26  work with their classmates to resolve conflicts on the ground level to avoid the escalation of peer issues. Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS): The principal, assistant principals, grade deans, and school counselors are trained or registered to attend the training. This approach provides skills so that support staff can become the catalyst through which students can change old habits, destructive responses, and maladaptive behavior patterns. This training assists schools in preventing crises from occurring, de- escalating potential crises. Comfort Dog Program Student Comfort Dog, "Sugar" will visit classrooms on a weekly basis and select teachers will implement the "Mutt I Gree" Program with a focus on Social Emotional Learning. Program is designed to help students articulate and be able to share their inner emotions and make connections with their peers which will improve peer relations within a classroom, grade and school. September 2018-June 2019 All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Grade Students and Staff Social Emotional Learning Curriculum Student Comfort Dog, "Sugar" will visit classrooms on a weekly basis and select teachers will implement the "Mutt I Gree" Curriculum and Respect for All Curriculum with a focus on Social Emotional Learning. Program is designed to help students articulate and be able to share their inner emotions and make connections with their peers which will improve peer relations within a classroom, grade and school. September 2018-June 2019 All populations and sub-populations of 6- 8th Grade Students and Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Deans, Grade Guidance Counselors, Respect for All Point Person, UFT Representatives CSA Representatives Comfort Dog Coordinator. Comfort Dog Team, Social Emotional Learning Team Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Deans, Grade Guidance Counselors, Respect for All Point Person, UFT Representatives CSA Representatives 2018-19 CEP 27  Social Emotional Learning Team will participate in book clubs, team meetings and work with the Instructional Cabinet to support the development of the program inside the classrooms. Periodic Social Emotional Surveys will be conducted three times during the school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Comfort Dog Coordinator. Comfort Dog Team, Social Emotional Learning Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to attend Monthly School Safety Meetings. In addition a safety portion of the monthly PTA meetings will be dedicated to communicating areas of need and how each household can support the school in terms of school safety and climate. Also, during Parent Teacher Conference Session and Back to School Night Event, seminars will be provided to parents and guest on hot topics to assist, support and educate all parties in current topics that will keep their child safe in and out of school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Guidance Counselors, Grade Deans Teachers, Students Borough Safety Director, Chancellors Office, School Foods, Comfort Dog Coordinators, Social Emotional Learning Team Instructional Resources : Instructional Resources: Three guidance counselors, one social worker, front office staff and five secretaries. Various adjustments during the Cafeteria Grade Periods to incorporate tutoring, sporting tournaments and other grade events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On a weekly basis, the Instructional Cabinet will meet to discuss the implementation of the SEL Model lessons within the classrooms and our students Social Emotional Survey Responses. In addition, the instructional cabinet along with the grade deans and grade guidance counselors will informally survey 6th, 7th and 8th grade students regarding their comfort level in the school environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The tools that is used to measure and assess progress will be both the citywide and in school student surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Middle School Quality Snapshot, IS 7 was rated as excellent in the subcategory of “How Well Teachers Work with One Another.” In the 2017-18 School Quality Guide the following information was revealed via the DOE survey. 100% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together. (Q8a) 98% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. (Q8b) 98% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. (Q8c) The most recent Learning Environment Survey reveals the following data. 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. (Q8d) In an effort to increase the percentage of staff who agree with the above statements, the school has become active participants in the District 31 Impact Team Initiative. In Spring 2017, a team comprised of teachers, coaches, and assistant principals attended a series of professional learning sessions presented by the Core Collaborative at the BFSC. These sessions addressed the design and implementation of impact teams in additional grades and Departments for the 2018-2019 school year. As an instructional cabinet, an introductory session outlining the purpose and benefits of impact teams on student performance was designed and delivered to staff. Staff attendees were then surveyed via Google Forms on our school’s G Suite domain. Teachers continue make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. Engaging in this work across each grade and department will allow teaching staff, coaches, and school leadership to continuously reflect on and refine practices throughout implementation while keeping student work and achievement at the forefront of this initiative. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the percentage of teachers who engage in collaborative inquiry utilizing the protocols established by the Impact Team Model (ITM). 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Communities: Teachers and Paraprofessionals work together to improve student achievement within a routine-based cycle revolving around distributive leadership (theory, study, plan, implement, analyze and adjust). Teachers from each team participate either in action research or the development of professional development using theory that discusses best practices. Every teacher team participates in an ongoing process of identifying the current level of student achievement, establishing a goal to improve the current level, working together to achieve that goal, and providing periodic evidence of progress. The team revolves around a learning organization with shared goals, collaborative teams focused on learning, collective inquiry into best practice and current practice, action experimentation, and commitment to continuous improvement to show progress in student achievement. Professional Development: Teachers from content areas attend PD meetings provided by our District. Members of the team turnkey the information to our teacher teams and implement the learned strategies and tools into their classrooms. The instructional cabinet and teacher leaders will develop professional develop sessions that support varied interest levels using the components embedded within the Impact Team model. All teachers and paraprofessionals Sept 2018 Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Staff and BFSC 6th, 7th, and 8th Grade Teachers Paraprofessionals Service Providers Sept 2018 Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, UFT Teacher Center, Teacher Leaders, School Staff and BFSC Instructional Coaches Instructional coaches support teachers within the classroom and outside of the classroom during common planning, one-to-one planning sessions, as well as 6th, 7th, and 8th Grade Teachers Sept 2018 Principal, 2018-19 CEP 32  grade/team professional development sessions. Coaches will support implementation of the Impact Team Model through in-classroom support, and individual and/or team coaching sessions. Paraprofessionals June 2019 Assistant Principals, Service Providers Instructional Coaches, UFT Teacher Center, Teacher Leaders, School Staff and BFSC Impact Teams: In partnership with the District 31 Impact Team grant, Impact Team members will support the development of pilot impact teams throughout the school. Support includes facilitation of Impact Teams, attendance at Impact Team PD sessions, and professional development sessions on the theory and application of Impact Teams. 6th, 7th, 8th Grade ELA and Math Teachers Instructional Coaches Sept 2018 Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, UFT Teacher Center, Teacher Leaders, School Staff and BFSC Principal Assistant Principals Instructional Coaches UFT Teacher Center Teacher Leaders School Staff BFSC 7th Grade Social Studies Team 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Paraprofessionals Service Providers Common Planning Teams- Teachers meet a minimum of four times a week to plan units of study, lesson plans, and/or analyze student work. Data Team: During this time, teachers volunteer to examine and analyze school-wide data and classroom formative/summative data to identify patterns and trends. As a result, the 6th , 7th , and 8th Grade Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Service Providers, Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, UFT Teacher Centers, Teacher Leaders, School Staff and BFSC data team develops a plan of action to address the needs and strengths of the school in order to develop coherence and structure through all grades. Professional Development Team: Teachers and paraprofessionals design professional development to support the cycle, as well as support the distributive leadership model. The staff studies theory and best practices to help support all students in becoming successful learners. 2018-19 CEP 33  Once the theory is studied, teachers begin to implement, revise, and analyze the trends and patterns. In addition to daily common planning sessions, and the PLC model described, the teams will work as part of an Impact Team Model (ITM) focused on improving student achievement. The teams will engage in work that combines two existing practices: formative assessment and collaborative inquiry. In partnering together, the teacher teams will use student work as the vehicle that will allow a stronger understanding of their impact on student learning and that allows teachers to continuously strengthen their expertise. The teams will utilize vertically aligned standards to provide remediation and enrichment as needed based on the student work that has been analyzed. Through this work the teams will foster a classroom culture in which teachers and students are partners in learning. The ITM will increase student achievement by supporting all learners as they take ownership of their learning. Student Panels On a consistent basis, following tasks in each of the Core Subjects, teacher teams pull a sample of students across a grade to share their feedback on their learning experiences relating to the assigned tasks. Students utilize rubric to evaluate learning opportunities to demonstrate mastery of the concepts. This feedback is provided by the student panel to the Instructional Cabinet and members of the Grade/Department Team. The team discusses, analyzes and utilizes the student feedback to implement any necessary changes in their unit plans and/or the assigned task. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Paraprofessionals Service Providers Instructional Coaches UFT Teacher Center Teacher Leaders School Staff BFSC How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement in our Collaborative Teacher initiatives to support practices will be supported throughout the year during the following sessions. The Parent Coordinator along with the PTA President will work in partnership with Ms. Testa who serves as the administrative liasion will oversee these initiatives. 2018-19 CEP 34  Curriculum Night Parent-teacher conferences PTA meetings School Leadership Team meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Peer Collaborative Teacher, UFT Teacher Center, Instructional Coaches, PD teams, Teacher Teams, Network Support Members Instructional Resources: Curriculum maps, lesson plans, formative and summative data Schedule Adjustments: Programmed strategically to allow teams common planning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a move towards a 3% increase in the percentage of teachers who engage in collaborative inquiry utilizing the protocols established by the Impact Team Model (ITM). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tracking and informally observing teachers implementing the protocols outlined for their Impact Team at the end of each Unit of Study. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The impact of strong effective school leadership is evident in well-developed ratings in three indicators on the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review: high expectations, teacher feedback, and teacher teams. Administrations’ procedures for communicating expectations and feedback to staff, providing professional development and learning opportunities, and fostering collaborative planning among staff members support theory that administrative practices nurture professional growth. In the 2017-18 School Quality Guide the following information was revealed via the DOE survey. 95% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e) 95% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. (Q11d) 95% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e) While our data shows the majority of staff members feel their professional development is nurtured by administration, there are several areas in which we can improve. For example, our efforts outlined in the action plan below focus on increasing the percentage of staff that reports they strongly agree that they are regularly supported and nurtured by leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the percentage of staff who indicates they feel the Professional Development was nurtured by the administration through an effective professional development plan as measured by the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The administration will provide staff with professional development opportunities both inside and outside of the building provided by the DOE and other professional organizations. These sessions will turnkey information from District work with the Core Collaborative. Additionally, the UFT Teacher Center will provide support and workshops within the building. The administration, with the support of the UFT, will apply for a series of calendar days for professional development. The Professional Development Plan will also provide teachers and paraprofessionals an opportunity to participate in Professional Book Clubs for teachers to read, discuss, and implement best practices examined in a professional resource. In addition, the administration will organize and plan professional development for teachers that is differentiated based upon the instructional cabinets’ feedback, teacher needs/strengths, and current best practices including but not limited to content and Social and Emotional Learning. Lastly, the principal will pull panels of teachers to assess needs and develop professional development centered on the Danielson Framework. Instructional Coaches: Instructional coaches are 6th, 7th, and 8th Grade Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Paraprofessionals Service Providers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, BFSC, UFT Teacher Center Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, BFSC, UFT Teacher Center 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers Sept 2018- programmed into core content areas to support teachers in June 2019 Paraprofessionals Service Providers common planning periods, observe classroom practices, and provide model lessons. Instructional coaches will facilitate “lab classrooms” to further support teacher practice. Additionally, instructional coaches will facilitate professional development sessions arising from school trends including using data to drive instruction, vertical alignment of standards, transference of visible thinking skills, book clubs and action research. 2018-19 CEP 37  Instructional Cabinet: Administration, and instructional coaches meet weekly to discuss best practices and plan and implement opportunities for professional growth. Principal common planning periods: the principal invites common planning teams to meet and discuss performance tasks. Lastly the administration will continue to conduct walk-troughs, provide feedback, and give teachers an opportunity to share their Professional Reflection: Administration and aspiring principals conduct walk-throughs to examine trends in instruction and share feedback, reflection, and next steps with common planning teams and individual teachers Impact Teams: In partnership with the District 31 Impact team grant, Impact Team members will support the development of select impact teams throughout the school. Support includes facilitation of Impact Teams, attendance at Impact Team PD sessions, and professional development sessions on the theory and application of Impact teams. Common Planning: Common planning periods programmed into teacher schedules. Teams meet to analyze student work, create lessons, and revise curriculum maps. Administration and Instructional Cabinet will meet with teacher teams to support the teams in the efforts to revise maps and develop assessments aligned to the CCLS. Student Panels On a consistent basis following tasks in each of the Core Subjects teacher teams pull a sample of students across a grade to share their feedback on their learning experiences relating to the assigned tasks. Students utilize rubric to evaluate learning opportunities to demonstrate mastery of the concepts. This feedback is provided by the student panel to the Instructional Cabinet and members of the Grade/Department Team. The team discusses, analyzes and utilizes the student feedback to implement any necessary changes in their unit plans and/or the assigned task. 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers September 2016- Principal, Paraprofessionals June 2017 Service Providers Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches BFSC UFT Teacher Center 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers Paraprofessionals Service Providers 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers Paraprofessionals Service Providers 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th Grade Teachers Paraprofessionals Service Providers Sept 2018- Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches BFSC UFT Teacher Center Sept 2018- Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches BFSC UFT Teacher Center Sept 2018- Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches BFSC UFT Teacher Center 2018-19 CEP 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement in our school leadership initiatives will be supported throughout the year during the following sessions: Curriculum Night Parent-teacher conferences PTA meetings School Leadership Team meetings Parents are provided with written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress on Pupil Path. In addition, Pupil Path is consistently updated to clarify the instructional goals. Teachers use the web site to provide updates regarding homework assignments, test schedules, resource links, and so on. It also serves as an interactive tool for individualizing support in order to connect the involvement of families in the learning process. We hold four Parent-Teacher conferences during the year. Parent-teacher conferences give parents the opportunity to boost communication about their child’s progress. Similarly, it's also an opportunity to extend the communication lines about the current objectives, strategies and plans for the students’ future together. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Coaches, PD teams, Teacher Teams, District Support Personnel Instructional Resources: Curriculum maps, lesson plans, released state exam questions, state test data, baseline/benchmark exams, books Schedule Adjustments: Teacher per session programmed strategically to allow teams common planning time and inter visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 39  In January 2019, Peer Collaborative Teachers and Coaches will provide informal surveys of staff to determine progress towards stated goal. By January 2019, there will be an increase of 1.5% of teachers reporting their professional development opportunities are nurtured through an effective PD plan as measured using an informal survey during PLCs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A survey will serve as a measure to reveal the level of teacher participation during Professional Development sessions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 98% of parents agree or strongly agree that IS 7 keeps them informed about their child’s academic progress through Skedula/Pupil Path, School Messenger and website. In June of 2018, an in house survey saw that only 30% of the student population participates in more than one outside learning service opportunity. In June 2018, more then eight hundred of the eleven hundred students in the 6th, 7th, and 8th grades took part in the ten school led-services and/or service-learning activities as stated in the 2016-2017 NYC Service in Schools survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have a 5% increase in the number of our students participating in school sanctioned service learning opportunities in the community as measured by student attendance at these events 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Reach out to Not for Profit organization between school and community to increase opportunities. Organizations including, but not limited to Bread of Life Food Drive, City Harvest, NY Cares and Toys for Tots (or a family in need). Certificates of Participation will be offered to top donating classes for various clothes, food and toy drives. Increase number of walks so more students can attend. Continue an alliance with Not for Profit Organizations, including, but not limited to UAU and local government officials, to increase percentage of students participating in community events. Sixth grade social studies department provides students with direct instruction to raise awareness of participation in community awareness. Students participate in researching community awareness that may impact their lives. Students will participate in a college tour, complete research and present research in Students Sept 2018 June 2019 Administration, Deans, Teachers, Guidance Dept., Parent Coordinator COSA & PTA Students Sept 2018 June 2019 Administration, Students Sept 2018 June 2019 Deans, Teachers, Guidance Dept., Parent Coordinator COSA & PTA Administration, Deans, Teachers, Guidance Dept., Parent Coordinator COSA & PTA 2018-19 CEP 42  Sept 2018 June 2019 a culminating College Share Fair in the Spring of 2019. 7th Grade guidance counselor will provide curriculum aligned to the College Access for All Initiative. Students will gain a perspective of the road to college including, but not limited to, academic requirements and how community involvement may impact acceptance and the college going experience. Parent workshops pertaining to College Access for All. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. -Urban Advantage NYC -College Access for All Initiative - partnership with St. John's University. -UAU Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional resources: - Two sixth grade social studies teachers, Partnerships with community (i.e. City Harvest, Toys for Tots, NY Cares and UAU). Support from St. John's University (College Access for All) vendors. Three deans, one social worker and one sapis worker. Human resources - Three Guidance Counselors, One Parent Coordinator, Four Assistant Principals 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, guidance staff will tally the amount of students participating in the charity events scheduled from September through January. Student participation will improve to 30%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In January 2019, guidance staff will compare the amount of students who participated in the charity events scheduled from September through January to attendance in the 2017-2018 charity events and record gains in percentage of participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) To identify areas of weakness on specific skills/standards At-risk students are identified and pulled for AIS during arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Optional after school test prep program Target low functioning/bottom 1/3 students When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service is provided on a daily basis within the classroom instructional period during arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Weekly after school program preceding state exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Teach-Assess-Regroup-Re-teach Small Group Instruction Lunch time tutoring One to One on a limited basis Peer Tutoring The school hopes to continue employ a full time paraprofessional teacher to provide small group instruction for our target population identified by the data team. Common Planning After school test prep program offered to all students strategies include a multimodality. approach targeting a variety of learning styles: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile. In addition, deficit areas identified through assessment. Four essential components of reading instruction are incorporated into the lessons: phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. This program maximizes students’ time reading, blends reading or writing into all subject areas, explicitly teachers how to make meaning of texts and gives students opportunities to discuss what they have learned. The Wilson Program is utilized by speech providers. 2018-19 CEP 45  Mathematics Science Service is provided on a daily basis within the classroom instructional period. After School Test Prep Small Group Instruction During arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Weekly after school program offered to all students preceding state exam Save room teacher also provides small group instructional support Service is provided on a daily basis within the classroom instructional period and during lunch periods. Small Group Instruction Lunch time tutoring One to One on a limited basis Peer Tutoring. Common Planning Small Group Instruction Lunch time tutoring One to one support on a limited basis Peer Tutoring At-risk students are identified and pulled for AIS during arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Target struggling/bottom 1/3 of students Focused groups of no more than eight students Approach targeting a variety of learning styles: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile. In addition, deficit areas identified through task-analysis will provide data to target areas of weakness. Additionally, our test prep program is offered to all students to target foundational skills, and provide test prep strategies. Students receive support based on teacher recommendations To identify areas of weakness on specific skills/standards At-risk students are identified and pulled forAISduring arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Approach targeting a variety of learning styles: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile. In addition, deficit areas identified through task-analysis will provide data to target areas of weakness. Optional after school test prep program Target low functioning/bottom 1/3 student Additionally, our test prep program is offered to all students to target foundational skills, and provide test prep strategies. 2018-19 CEP 46  Social Studies To identify areas of weakness on specific skills/standards At-risk students are identified and pulled forAISduring arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Approach targeting a variety of learning styles: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile. In addition, deficit areas identified through task-analysis will provide data to target areas of weakness. Optional after school test prep program Small Group Instruction Lunch time tutoring One to one support on a limited basis Peer Tutoring Service is provided on a daily basis within the classroom instructional period and during lunch periods. Additionally, our test prep program is offered to all students to target foundational skills, and provide test prep strategies. Guidance Counseling Small Group and 1:1 Service is provided during the course of the school day . Target low functioning/bottom 1/3 student To identify areas of weakness on specific skills/standards At-risk students are identified and pulled forAISduring arts and tech, foreign language, and technology periods Optional after school test prep program Target low functioning/bottom 1/3 student At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 48 Guidance staff will meet with the students and families on a semi-regular basis to monitor their most current living conditions. After initial meeting, guidance will work with staff to provide students with all necessary school supplies such as textbooks, notebooks and basic writing instruments. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 50  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 51  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 55  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 57  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Elias Bernstein Intermediate School 7 Borough Staten Island School Number 7 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Nora De Rosa Coach Timonthy Imbemba, Math Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Brianna Benanti Teacher/Subject Area Jamie Russo Teacher/Subject Area Elena Romeo Related-Service Provider Emanuel Giardina Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Dina Testa, ELA AP Coach Melissa Cepeda, ELA Coach School Counselor Nicole Lark Parent Mrs. Evangelista Parent Coordinator Barbara Zaremba Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) Ariana Rosenthal- ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.75% D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1193 Total number of ELLs 2018-19 CEP 60  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that our schools uses to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs are as follows: TCRWP Informal Reading Conferences Unit Tasks Wrap- Informal Writing and Reading Profile We obtain our data from TCRWP assess, which determines reading level by letter usually two times per year, in both September and January. The data obtained is used to drive meaningful instruction that coincides with each of the students' needs, based on the levels at which they are performing. The data is used to construct lessons such as vocabulary focus or picture to word associations, write IEP goals, create classroom goals, implement small group instruction, as well as whole class instruction. Based on their scores and ELL levels, students are partnered or grouped to help meet individual needs. Our informal reading conferences and unit tasks are teacher created assessments where the teacher works closely with the students on their individual listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills. The teacher creates assessments that match each level of the students' performance goals. For example, from the data collected from our Entering ELLs, it was observed that the students can read English, but when it comes to Speaking the language, they struggle. To help them build on their knowledge, students practice using multiple sentence stems in each 2018-19 CEP 61  lesson. Students who scored at the Expanding level are able to complete different activities that assist them in completing all assignments and unit tasks in their classroom setting. These activities incorporate all four elements and often are based on content area as well, to help them achieve the Commanding level in the up coming year. The formative assessments that our school uses throughout the year help our ENL teacher and the classroom teachers of the ENL students plan future lessons for the ENL students. For example, if a formative assessment shows that an ENL student is struggling with a specific skill, the ENL teacher will work to create supplementary resources that will aid the student in achieving that skill. Formative assessments aid the ENL teacher in planning for her integrated and Stand-Alone sessions with the ENL students. The TCRWP assessment tool correlates to the Fountas and Pinnell system for leveling books and helps teachers identify which students can read independently with proper analysis of comprehension and fluency. The data collected from these assessments, such as their reading level, helps the teacher design lessons geared towards their weaknesses in the classroom. Additional modifications are made in both the freestanding and push-in lessons for each individual ELL to drive them to meet their goals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? n order to support this effort, there are multiple structures in place to ensure that all assessments are benefiting the needs for the students. For example, our ENL Stand-Alone teacher plans with other teachers the ENL students have to ensure that their assessments are valid and meeting the needs of each student. The ENL teacher shares appropriate strategies with all teacher's to assist the students at their individual level. The ENL teacher also works in the Integrated setting with the current ELLs to help pre-annotate the texts they are working with in their respective classes. Any assessments the students are given in their respective classes have been over viewed by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher also shares the reading levels with each teacher to ensure that the students are working with students at their similar level to encourage appropriate academic conversations between the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our freestanding ELL program, we use a diverse amount of informal assessments throughout the school day and year. These assessments include independent activities, essays, tests, quizzes, vocabulary development, and unit tasks. All of these informal assessments are linked by grade level and performance level to the skills the children are developing in their ELA classes. They are also linked to the appropriate Common Core Standards per grade of the student. Our freestanding ELL program is also measured by formal assessments such as the annual student performance on the NYSESLAT. ELL students are expected to demonstrate progress in all indicators and move towards the expanding and eventually the commanding levels as an end goal. Because our students are so diverse, we adjust our instructional approaches and teaching resources according to the needs of the students. During the 2017-2018 school year, four out of our eleven current ENL students scored at the Commanding Level; three out of the eleven moved up one or two levels; three out of the eleven remained at the same level, which was expanding. When these results become available, the ENL looks at the individual score the students received in each of the four tested modalities. The teacher notes the growth in each section and plans lessons and further assessments based on the skills the students still need to improve in. New York State ELA test scores are also checked to compare how the students are scoring in comparison to their English speaking peers. Just as the ELA English speaking students are assessed based on the common core standards, our ENL students are held in the same regard and their progress is tracked as well. In comparison to the other students in our school, our ENL students are making progress and are testing on an average level with the other students. Two of our ENL students have been placed into Honor's classes for the 2017-2018 school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, our ENL teacher analyzes each child's strengths and weaknesses. As soon as a comprehensive list has been gathered, the ENL teacher shares these strengths and weaknesses with the rest of that student's teachers. It is imperative that all of the child's teachers work together to apply the best strategies that will meet each ENL student's needs. For students who are struggling well below grade level, we have different forms of RTI programs that can be beneficial to their needs. Students who struggle can be pulled from their Arts and Technology classes up to three times per week to help address their needs in a small group setting, with a teacher who knows their struggles. Within these groups, the students will have ongoing practice and support with the skills they are struggling with. Students will also be grouped with 2018-19 CEP 62  other students who have similar struggles so they can work in groups or pairs to have academic conversations that can also foster their growth. Students will be continually assessed throughout the year to determine their new skill level and to track advancements and any struggles that may still exist. At IS 7, we also were awarded an Arts grant for our ENL and Special Education students that all students are encouraged to attend. This program centers on communication, different arts skills, and showcasing skills outside of the classroom. In addition, once a week, our ENL teacher hosts an after school workshop for ENL students and their parents to come and practice the skills students are struggling with in ELA and ENL. The program has been a great success throughout the year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At IS 7 we provide our ELLs with Academic Intervention Services by first analyzing the levels at which the students are scoring on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL for new admits. Before assigning students to an RTI and AIS program, some of the elements we take into account are the students' English level and home language literacy, needs of long term ELLs, results on their language assessment, and the number of years they gave received bilingual education, if any at all. All of our students are taught within a small group and on their own performance level due to the small volume of ELL students we have. Students work toward common goals with other students at their level and have focused goals and modifications to help them achieve the goals they need to achieve. All students receive Tier 1 instruction in their classes and receive Tier 2 and Tier 3 in their pull-out program. Our current Freestanding program contains no more than six students per class, which allows for ample intervention techniques and personalized instruction geared to meet the needs of each student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At IS 7, the main outcome assessment that we use to evaluate our ELL program is the NYSESLAT. Based on how students score on their NYSESLAT is how we group them into specific classes and groups according to their required services. Currently, as soon as the NYSESLAT scores are in, we sit and go through each students' score. From there, we create a list of all current ENL students for the upcoming school year and group them by class. For example, this year, we had three current ELL students in the seventh grade. These students scored in the expanding, transitioning, and emerging levels. While these students are all placed in the same ICT classroom, the students were able to gain their supports from the ENL teacher in the building everyday in class. Our ENL teacher is also a ELA teacher, so during small group instruction, these students were often pulled (according to their allotted minutes) for push-in instruction. The benefits of being able to program our ENL students into classes based on their NYSESLAT scores is that they are often together and get to know each other and be familiar with on another. Our ENL teacher is able to work with them daily, during their ELA period to help meet their needs and provide strategies that will best suit them in the classroom. Another example of using the NYSESLAT to inform our ELL programs was this year in the eighth grade; we had three current ENL students at the expanding and transitioning stages. Because they have similar levels, they were also placed together in an ICT classroom, where they not only had the support of two teachers in each core class, but the support of the ENL teacher who provided push-in services four times per week for these students. Additionally, we do use Regents data to place our incoming eighth grade students. Our students who tested into the Regents program are all placed based on their abilities and will receive push-in services from one of the two ENL teachers in the building. ELA and Math State tests scores are used as data to see how our students have progressed and where their struggles still lie. This data is presented to their current ELA and Math teachers at the beginning of the school year by the ENL teacher and is used to construct lesson plans that will target the skills the ENL students are struggling most with. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings to make adjustments to our ENL program, our ENL teacher works very closely with our student and teacher programmer. Once the data is collected and students are placed with their respective teachers, the ENL teacher meets with each group of teachers to discuss the levels of each of the students. Often times, the ENL teacher will be placed to integrate with some of these teachers to provide additional strategies, small group, and one-on-one support to the students who need it. When integrating into classrooms to support the ENL students, our ESL teacher works with the students in a small group or one-on-one to assist them in their class work. Often times, the ENL teacher provides supplementary strategies to assist these students as well. During the Stand-Alone period, our ENL teacher works with two students who 2018-19 CEP 63  require the extra periods. During this time, the teacher will work specifically on skills the students are struggling with, in addition to providing English reading, writing, listening, and speaking strategies. Our ENL teacher also holds Professional Development opportunities with the staff in order to disseminate the findings and prepare all staff for any adjustments that need to be made to the program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. IS 7 provides English Language Learners with a Stand-Alone English as a New Language program in all grades, sixth through eighth. There are two teachers who provide ENL instruction to the ELL students; they are the licensed ELL teachers in the school (Brianna Benanti and Ariana Rosenthal). The teachers both provide instruction to the students five days a week, utilizing both the integrated and stand alone methods of instruction. At IS 7, there are currently three Expanding, four Transitioning, two Emerging level students, and two Entering level students. There are no eighth grade, one seventh grade and three sixth grade Expanding students. There is one Emerging sixth and one Emerging eighth grade student and there are three transitioning students; one in each respective grade. There is one Entering seventh grade student and one Entering sixth grade student. The entering students are seen 360 minutes a week; with four standalone periods and four integrated ELA periods. The Emerging students is seen five periods a week as a integrated service during their ELA class and an additional five periods a week as a standalone service. They are grouped diversely in their ELA class with the rest of the students and in their standalone periods, because none of the students are on the same level of proficiency; this student does work one-on-one with the teacher during both the stand alone and integrated services, and has shown much progress from his diverse setting in working with a variety of students. The three transitioning students are taught five periods a week in a integrated setting. Due to scheduling conflicts, the sixth grade student is seen five periods a week in a stand alone setting while the seventh and eighth grade students are visited in a integrated setting in their ELA classes. Although they are on different proficiency levels, they all have IEPs and are learning the same content. Modifications are made based on their proficiency levels, but ultimately they are taught the same content and can work together in the class room setting. All expanding students are seen in integrated setting for ELA two periods a week. All mandated minutes are met by utilizing the integrated and standalone ENL program. The students receive support in different classroom enviornments to assist their learning and to provide optimal chances for growth. At all times students are engaged with other students at their proficiency level and others as well, to help them learn from not only their teacher but their peers as well. The sixth, seventh, and eighth grade ELLs are all placed in one class throughout the day, however those with the lower proficiency scores get pulled-out during their arts and technology period to gain more ELL support. Students who are placed in regents classes are seen in a push-in setting two periods a week in a content area classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 64  As previously stated, IS 7 delivers and meets explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes by utilizing the Integrated system of pushing-in and pulling-out. The ELL teacher follows a program that meets the mandated required minutes for each ELL student. Students who are considered at the Intermediate level are mandated to 180 minutes per week. Out of those 180 minutes, 90 of them need to be obtained through the integration of the ELA content area. the Additional 90 minutes that remain can be in the standalone enviornment or the ELA/content area classroom. For students who scored and are considered Advanced, they are also mandated for 180 minutes a week, but all 180 minutes must come from the integrated ENL/ELA or content area. Because our bell schedule varies with different lengths throughout the day, this causes issues with the scheduling of our ELLs. Due to the fact that only a small portion of our ELLs are in the same homeroom and follow completely different schedules, we tally the total number of periods based on the number of minutes per period to ensure that the ELL student receives the total mandated minutes per week. According to the New York City CR 154 for English as a New Language Students, students at the Entering level are mandated to receive a total of 360 minutes of mandated services; 180 in a stand alone ENL program, and 180 minutes in an integrated ELA/ENL classroom. For students at the Emerging level are also mandated to receive 360 total minutes of services; 90 minutes in the stand alone ENL program, 180 in integrated ENL/ELA, and a flexibility option of having 90 minutes in a subject area other than ELA. Students at the Transitioning level are required to receive 180 minutes of services; 90 of them must be in integrated ENL/ELA and the other 90 can be in another integrated subject area. Students who score at the Expanding level are required to receive 180 minutes as well, with all 180 minutes in the ENL/ELA integrated classroom setting. Students at the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes a week in an integrated ELA/ENL classroom setting for two years after scoring at this level. When the ENL teacher enters the ELA classroom for the integrated approach, she works very closely with the ELA teacher of the classroom to provide modifications and small group instruction for each ENL student at their specific level. Our ENL teacher is also a ELA teacher, who provides services within her classroom to sixth grade students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ELL teacher at IS 7 ensures that the ENL curriculum reinforces the Common Core Learning Standards of each particular grade level. Although content area instruction is presented by the classroom teacher(s), the ELL teacher is included in the integrated approach (pushing-in) for Math and ELA, and other content areas if scheduling requires it. While working with the integrated approach, content area instruction is delivered by using cooperative and smaller learning groups, partner work, differentiation, and modeling techniques. Usually while in small groups, ELLs are provided with some material such as manipulatives, graphic organizers or vocabulary charts/flashcards that will aid them in the content that is being taught, all while reinforcing the skills taught in the standalone method. Other materials used in these push-in settings are sentence stems to help students formulate and arrive at answers and picture to word associations that help them draw connections with any unknown words. IS 7 using the Workshop Model for Reading and Writing, which are taught using a variety of leveled texts. It is during these sessions that the ELL teacher sits with individual or groups of students and chunks text, presents strategies, and helps students target the central ideas and important details in each paragraph. The ELL teacher also tries to use a more audio-visual approach that can something mean acting out scenes or characters or even providing pictures of things being discussed in the text. In content areas such as ELA and Math, the ELL teacher focuses mainly on scaffolding new information that can be related to listening, reading, writing, and speaking. The aspects the ELL teacher builds upon are the four modalities of the ENL program. When the ELL teacher is pushing-in, she supports which ever lesson the classroom teacher is presenting to the class and focuses on supporting instruction with vocabulary. In terms of vocabulary, content area teachers foster language development by teacher tier 1, 2, and 3 words and by applying vocabulary filters when teaching their lesson. The filters are separated into five groups: unknown words from text, familiar words, highly concrete words, word meaning family, word part family, and word changes. As additional support, the ELL teacher provides ELL students with Frayer Models which calls for students to create a visual for each word, use it in a sentence, and provide examples for ways the word can be used, all by analyzing the definition. In addition to the methods stated above, both teachers utilize pre and post assessments to guide instruction. While the NYS Common Core Learning Standards are demanding for most children, at IS 7 we provide our ENL students with multiple standards based modifications to accommodate their language needs based on their individual language levels. 2018-19 CEP 65  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, the ESL teacher ensures that the following assessments are administered in their native language if necessary: NYS Math test for grades 6, 7, and 8. The ENL teacher works closely with our testing department to make sure all of their needs are met appropriately. Students taking the NYS ELA exam must take the English version of the test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A.) We currently do not have any SIFE students at IS 7, but if we were to receive SIFE students, we would address their needs by ensuring that they can receive some support in their native language to test whether they are on grade level or not. SIFE students also need a stronger background on content in order to reach grade level, so they will work with the ELL teacher who runs an after school program for ELLs once a week. This time can provide additional to support to SIFE students. SIFE students may also benefit from an RTI extra class during the week that can help them gain more academic support, in a smaller class setting.B.) Newcomers are welcomed to IS 7 by being immersed in content and literacy experiences within their balanced literacy instruction in the content-area classrooms and the ELL classroom as well. During an ELLs first year in the program, they are not required to take the ELA exam, but must take content area exams. For the first time, ELLs will be introduced to state testing structure which will help them meet the demands of the rigorous state testing program. Within the regular classroom, ELLs will be supported by their ELL teacher as readers and writers and will be provided with many strategies that will be beneficial in adapting the English language. Students are encouraged to work in groups with their peers to help them communicate and be as immersed as possible in their new language.C.) For ELL students who are developing (4-6 years of support) students are identified for RTI services available within the school day. ELA skills are focused on using item skill analysis and classroom teacher data. Like all ELLs, developing students receive support in all areas of the four modalities. D.) Long term ELLs who have received services for more than six years are still mandated to receive which ever services are necessary for their level. At this point, the ELL teacher works closely with the Special Education Director and the School Assessment Team to examine the students' needs and schedules more intensively. All of our ELLs who are long term ELLs also have an IEP, which means it is even more imperative to work with the Special Education Director to discuss progress.E) Former ELLs are ELL students who have tested out of the ELL program by scoring a commanding on the NYSESLAT for two years. According to the newly revised mandates for ELLs, former ELLs receive 90 minutes of related services in the content area classroom per week. During this time, former ELLs also still have their usual testing accommodations; time extension, separate locations, and usage of bilingual glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To provide access to academic content areas and development English language development, teachers of ELL-SWDs utilize a combination of ELL instructional strategies such as: Comprehensible Input, Interactive Style, Modified Input, Output Hypothesis, and Negotiated Interaction. All of these strategies allow students to improve their fluency levels through reading, listening, speaking, and writing. These strategies help students move beyond just listening and reading; it encourages them and helps them develop into speakers, listeners and writers. The ELL teacher meets and discusses progress of the ELL-SWD student with his or her ELA teacher to ensure that both can work together to promote their learning. Students use programs on the iPads to help them gather skills. Other materials we use are additional texts, sentence stems, graphic organizers, picture to word associations, flash cards, and vocabulary lists. All of these materials used in the classroom are grade and age appropriate because they are all materials the students can utilize in each content area classroom independently. Students who are at the Entering level use more flashcards and picture associations to help them foster connections while those transitioning and expanding students are able to incorporate sentence stems and graphic organizers independently. All of these materials are a combination of different planning programs such as Teachers College and and Expositionary Learning. All 2018-19 CEP 66  of these materials accelerate English language acquisition because they allow and support students to grow with their skills in their content level as well as the English language. Because these resources provide additional support, students are able to break down and learn the content while learning English as well. When the ELL teacher integrates ELL instruction with ELA, the ELL-SWD is being serviced in that content area, which will further help them develop as they meet their yearly goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We develop flexible planning for ELL-SWDs. For example, a student who is ELL-SWD can be in an ICT classroom for one period but can be mainstreamed for another subject area. Or school individualizes schedules of ELL-SWDs so they can receive their mandated ESL and IEP services. We determine which students can benefit from an ICT classroom based on their proficiency level as an ELL and how they are performing in the classroom content wise. Many of our ELLs are placed in an ICT classroom, whether they have disabilities or not because they can always benefit from the assistance of another adult in the room. Having more opportunity to ask questions and receive support can be extremely beneficial to an ELL, especially during the beginning years of learning English. An example of this from last year is that two ELL students (one ELL-SWD) were switched into a different humanities class apart from their regular class. While these two students are not in an ICT classroom for the majority of the day, they are for their period I integrate into their humanities classroom, so I can service them as an ELL service and the Special Education teacher in the room can assist as well. This school year, our seventh grade ELLs (even those who scored commanding) were placed in an ICT room with the ELL teacher who also teaches ELL to ensure optimal support in a full sized classroom. This method has been extremely efficient and effective for our ELL students with disabilities because they are receiving their support in the least restrictive environment with a general education and special education teacher. For our students who are still struggling with specific skills, we do offer a pull-out classroom setting for the ENL students; during an arts and technology period, the ENL students can meet with their ENL teacher to practice skills that can help them succeed in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. n the case of targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and Math, IS 7 offers RTI, and an after school optional program with the ELL teacher. All of the targeted intervention programs used at IS 7 are taught in English. The AIS program offers tutoring in Math and ELL to ELL-SWDs during a teacher's prep period. This program aligns with the common core and allows for extra practice on concepts covered in class. Additionally, when their schedule allows for an extra class, ENL students are recommended to have a "Journalism" class where they work with an ELA teacher to further reinforce the ELA skills being addressed in class that given week. The after school program is option and is taught two hours a week. Students who feel as though they need help with a skill are encouraged to come and can bring a parent as well. Although this is optional, students are encouraged to attend, especially with a parent, so the parent can also better their skills and have more of an understanding of their child's academic strengths and weaknesses. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For this upcoming year, IS 7 will continue to offer after school support for ELLs. By doing this, we hope to provide even more support for the students at their own individual level. This extra addition will give the students time to meet with their ELL teacher and to get any needed assistance in their content level classes. We will also continue to look for helpful programs for our ELLs, such as Achieve 3000 which focuses to target students who are below grade reading level. It provides online texts to foster an ELLs growth and will therefore help them build the skills they need to progress to more difficult content at their grade level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None/Not Applicable due to the low volume of ENL students in our building, we have not yet needed to form a bilingual program. 2018-19 CEP 67  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students at IS 7 are afforded the same opportunities. All ELL students are offered equal access to all school programs by invitation, recommendation, and purposeful request. ELL students are invited to these programs the same way all other students are; by notification. The school ensures that students are sent home with letters in their parent's choice of communication so they can discuss what after school activities they may want to participate in. By observing the number of ELLs who are currently participating in after school extra-curricular activities, it is evident that all ELLs are welcomed and are involved in all school programs that interest their individual requests. Some after school programs our ELLs participate in are yearbook, cheer leading, enrichment classes, technology classes, dance, musical theater, and performances that occur throughout the school year. They are constantly involved in events such as Field Day, going on class trips, and our annual Turkey Bowl and basketball games. The PTA works to provide funds for these activities and ELLs are always encouraged to participate. At IS 7, we offer afternoon ENL workshops, and during the 2016-2017 school year, offered a photography program to all of our ENL students. For the 2017-2018 school year we will continue to have the afternoon ENL workshops for ENL students and their parents to attend to learn different strategies to support these students in their learning. All students are notified via letter and PupilPath for any after school opportunities they may want or need to attend. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At IS 7, every classroom has a computer, Triumph Board, and an ELMO projector. These pieces of technology are used daily to assist in lessons and do aid the support of ELL growth. Students also have access to iPads and laptops in the building and can use them in the classroom setting. This year, many students began to bring in their tablets for class note-taking and it has been a great success. ELLs can use the technology to view pictures and videos on topics being covered in class, which promotes their growth with the English language. Students will be able to read texts electronically and can find pictures easier on their tablets to help them make connections. Everyday, students are engaged with technology in all content area classrooms which helps them stay focused and on task. ENL students at the Entering and Emerging levels are encouraged to use their phones to help them translate meanings of words while working in class. Although they not use them constantly, it does help them make connections to words in English from the start and improves their use of the English language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our freestanding ENL model, the ELL teacher provides native language support to all ELLs by using support materials such as the internet, bilingual books, and bilingual dictionaries/glossaries. A student's native language is also embraced during many classroom activities and discussions where they are responsible for explaining life in their native land to the other students. Students work to complete projects and use each others background knowledge and culture to gain multiple perspectives. If two students with the same home language are in the same class, they are usually paired to assist each other. In all classrooms throughout the school, classroom diversity is appreciated and celebrated. At this time, we do not offer Dual Language or a Bilingual Educational classroom setting, but our students are constantly relating things back to their home language and can make connections through pictures, vocabulary, and background knowledge. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL teacher and school programmer work together to ensure that mandated services appropriately support ELLs by grouping them accordingly by grade. Within the different grade levels there are different proficiency levels, so students at the same proficiency levels generally work together. All resources are grade appropriate and align with the curriculum for each specific grade level. Over the past two years, we have tried to group the students into the same class so the ENL teacher can push into their ELA class and help meet their mandated minutes in ELA. It has been very successful and beneficial to have our ENL teacher do this because she is able to pull a small group and provide ample strategies to the different levels on ENL students in the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 68  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? IS 7 is not a collocated school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time, unfortunately there is no separate program in place to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. Because we essentially we do not know how many ELLs are arriving over the summer, it is difficult to plan a program that would be helpful for ELLs prior to the school year start. As soon as the year does begin though, IS 7 sends home letters for students who wish to be student monitors, who can buddy up with a new ELL student and help them get acclimated to the building. The ELL teacher will monitor and assist the monitor in his or her job and will make sure that all students are working in a positive way. Starting in September, our ENL teacher hosts a parent and student workshop where parents can meet their child and work on specific skills with them. This program is once a week for one hour and focuses on ELA reading and writing skills to help ENL students and their parents with their English. When students register to IS 7 in the middle of the school year, they work extremely close with the ELL teacher and they are given a ELL "buddy". Their buddy is usually someone in the ELL class who has been through a similar situation and can help them adjust. The "buddy" will also help the student with class assignments, explain homework, and any other work that is assigned to the new ELL. The grade assistant principal can also check in on the student, as well as any other classroom teacher who works with the student. Our parent coordinator works closely with ENL students and their parents to ensure a smooth transition throughout the year. Our counselors are always available to meet with these students as well. This year specifically, we found that there were multiple general education students who spoke Russian who were able to communicate with an Entering ELL student in their class. This is just one example of a buddy that could help this student get adjusted to the school. Students can also work closely with their grade counselor during the adjustment period if necessary. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At IS 7, we offer Italian and Spanish as a language elective to our ELLs. We offer the same language electives for our general education and special education students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to ensure that our staff is receiving adequate ELL support and instructional practices, our school sends the ELL teacher to many Professional Development presentations throughout the year. On professional development days, the ELL teacher works with some staff members on techniques that can be beneficial to ELL growth in academics. At this time, there are no specific PD dates in place that relate specifically to ELL students, but we are working to create one in the future. Due to the 2018-19 CEP 69  relatively low percentage of ELLs at the school, not all teachers are teaching ELLs, but those who are have already met with the ELL teacher to discuss proficiency levels and routes to take to help them in the classroom. The best practices learned at presentations are shared with staff throughout the year. Related service providers, assistant principals (Dina Testa, Joesph Mennella, Vincent Verdiglione, and Lauren Fisher), testing coordinators, paraprofessionals, and our coaches also participate in professional development that is related to ELL services. Our coaches at IS 7 (Melissa Cepeda, Ursula Du Britz, Timothy Imbemba, and Allison Dunn) run a majority of our PDs and involve all teachers of all students. We have content area PDs that focus on strategies to help all learners in our school. All of our staff is responsible for having at least 15% of our professional development hours dedicated to learning about ELLs and how to teach to their needs as well. These professional development plans will focus on language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ELL teachers are required to have 50% of their hours dedicated to these elements. Other resources are available to staff members is to attend professional development sessions on the network website. Teachers are provided professional development opportunities within our network and throughout city-based workshops, which are aligned and based off of the Common Core Standards. The ELL teacher works specifically with ELA teachers throughout the year to find ways to align their lessons within the integrated approach. These teachers work together to utilize similar strategies that can be used on the ELA and NYSESLAT assessments and on other assessments throughout the school year. The ELL teacher tries to implement strategies that can assist the ELLs on the same content that are learning in the ELA classes to further English proficiency. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. While all teachers should have an appropriate amount of ELL training, it is extremely important for the teachers of ELLs in the content classroom to be aware of any transitions that are occurring for the students. It is the job of the ELL teacher to provide support for the content classroom teachers, students, and parents of new ELL students. Resources will be provided to the staff to assist them in the needs of the ELLs. In addition to the Elementary to Middle School transition, IS 7 hosts a High School Information night for all 8 th grade students to help them prepare for high school. The guidance counselors at IS 7 work very closely with the ELL teachers to ensure that the ELL students are transitioning well. Students who appear to be frustrated and not transitioning well meet with the ELL teacher and guidance counselor to address their needs. ELL students partake in the same activities as all other students at IS 7, such as after school activities, trips, and dances. The ELL teacher and the assistant principal arranges for th ELL teacher to train teachers who need 15% of their professional development hours to be in ELL training. First, the assistant principal sends the ELL teacher to training to learn new and best practices for ELL students and these can be turn keyed into professional development sessions. These professional development plans will focus on language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ELL teachers are required to have 50% of their hours dedicated to these elements. Other resources are available to staff members is to attend professional development sessions on the network website. Our records are maintained through a personalized staff hour sheet. When the hours are completed, they are submitted to the principal and are stored in the teacher's file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent-Teacher Conference night happens in our school twice a year. During these afternoon and night sessions, our turnout rate is very high and we have the opportunity to speak to many parents one on one about the goals of the ELL program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content 2018-19 CEP 70  areas. There is also an ELL parent orientation when new ELLs arrive in our building, where the teacher meets with the parents to discuss all aspects of the classes and programs the students will be partaking in. Beginning in the upcoming school year, IS 7 will be setting up meetings throughout the school year for each individual child. During these meetings, it is required to discuss the progress of the ELLs and provide feedback for the parents as well. For any of these meetings throughout the school year, the parents are entitled to translation services and the administrators will utilize the translations unit provided by the DOE to ensure all parents can communicate with the teachers. Our parent coordinator works with the parents to provide relative information for all ELLs to keep parents involved with what is going on in the child's program. IS 7 also hosts an after school program one a week where parents are free to attend an ELL workshop with their child on best practices and strategies they are learning in class. The idea behind this is that parents will have the opportunity to work with their child and learn new skills as well that will be beneficial to both of their success. #2 ANSWER: Once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meeting provided for parents or guardians, schools must meet with individual parents or guardians of the ELL student. During this meeting, the goals of the program, their child's language development process, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas are discussed. At these meetings, if translation services are needed, it is the job of the ELL teacher and administration to utilizes translation services. Any staff necessary to contribute to the discussion of the child's progress is encouraged to attend. Attendance is kept in the ELL binder where all other paper work regarding the status of our ELLs is kept. Throughout the school year additional outreach attempts are made through phone calls and letters that are sent home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Beginning three school years ago, IS 7 implemented an after school program once a week for parents and ELL students to attend together. During this two hour session, the ELL teacher provided resources ELLs can utilize to promote student growth and success. Our parent coordinator is Barbara Zaremba and she works to communicate with parents and ensure that they stay up to date on all IS 7 activities. Students who attended the program worked closely with the teacher on strategies and ways to improve in their content areas. Parents were invited to attend and although the turn out rate for parents was low due to work schedules, they knew their children were attending and kept up to date on what skills they were practicing. Parents are always invited to all school activities and are encouraged to participate with their children. For translation services we contact the DOE translations unit who supports our school with translators that can communicate with the parents. In addition, during the 2016-2017 school year, our ELL program was awarded an Arts Grant, which involved both parents and the students in an after school photography program. Answer to NUMBER 2 ABOVE: All records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parent needs are accommodated are recorded in the student's cumulative folder. Every time the ELL teacher reaches out to a parent whether it be by letter or phone call, it is documented or copied to be stored in the cumulative folder as well as the ELL teacher's binder. All parents are contacted in the specific language of their choice. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 71 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nora De Rosa, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Elias Bernstein Intermediate School DBN: 31R007 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Nora De Rosa Title Principal Dina Testa Assistant Principal Barbara Zaremba Parent Coordinator Brianna Benanti ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mariana Ashkinadze Parent Jamie Russo Teacher/Subject Area Elena Romeo Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Cepeda Tim Imemba Nicole Lark Anthony Lodico Enrico Domingo Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/14/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R007 School Name: Elias Bernstein Intermediate School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Barbara Zaremba Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When ELL students are newly identified, parents must complete the Home Language Identification Survey which will provide the information needed to determine what language they speak. Parents must indicate how they wish to be contacted in a written and oral communication preferred language letter. For ELLs coming from another building, their information will be transferred and updated into ATS so the appropriate staff can be notified of language preferences and the placement of the student. Translation and interpretation services are provided for all parents who do not speak English, both written and orally. At any time in the year when a parent needs to communicate with the school, the school will provide translation services from the DOE translations unit to help the communication barrier. All surveys and information given in out throughout the school year is to be translated to the parent’s preferred language and in written form. Our school does utilize the ATS RAPL report to ensure that all parents are receiving documents that are translated and interpreted correctly. 2018-19 CEP 74  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic Chinese Italian Russian Spanish Albanian German Polish Filipino Urdu Rest 19 24 5 43 13 5 1 2 2 1 92.8 1.46 1.84 0.38 3.3 1 0.38 0.08 0.15 .0.15 0.08 Rest 17 13 5 42 13 7 1 2 2 1 92.8 1.3 1 0.38 3.22 1 .054 0.08 .015 0.15 0.08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Any school written correspondence letters that come from the Chancellor's Office Throughout the School Year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Copies of the letters will be downloaded in all respective languages from the DOE. We will access the language line to provide parents with documents in the language of their choice. 2018-19 CEP 75  Trip Notifications Throughout the School Year Handbooks Throughout the School Year All copies will be sent out to the translations unit, approximately two weeks prior to ensure timely distribution. Copies of the letters will be downloaded in all respective languages from the DOE. We will access the language line to provide parents with documents in the language of their choice. School based Calendars Begnning of the School Year/September Copies of the letters will be downloaded in all respective languages from the DOE. We will access the language line to provide parents with documents in the language of their choice. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTC Two times per year: October/March ELL Parent Orientation Beginning of School Year IEP Meetings Throughout the School Year interpretation service(s)? These services can be provided by any fully licensed staff member in the building who are bilingual and can translate. For lower incident languages, funds allocated from the Translation and Interpretation Budget will be utilized. Staff members from other schools can also be paid and utilized for any translations they can make for lower incident languages. These services can be provided by any fully licensed staff member in the building who are bilingual and can translate. For lower incident languages, funds allocated from the Translation and Interpretation Budget will be utilized. Staff members from other schools can also be paid and utilized for any translations they can make for lower incident languages. Our school will also directly contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for over-the-phone translation services for IEP conferences. 2018-19 CEP 76  Curriculum Conferences September These services can be provided by any fully licensed staff member in the building who are bilingual and can translate. For lower incident languages, funds allocated from the Translation and Interpretation Budget will be utilized. Staff members from other schools can also be paid and utilized for any translations they can make for lower incident languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school’s communication strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families are as follows: We will follow all protocol that is in place for our English speaking families. In addition to this, if time permits, we will utilize a bilingual teacher who speaks any needed language. If time permits, we will utilize the funds allocated from the Translations Unit to provide as prompt services for our limited-English-Proficient families as possible. Additionally, families will be contacted via the language line and an automated over-the-phone translation Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The principal of our school, Dr. De Rosa, reviews the Chancellor’s Regulations at the faculty conferences we have on the first day of each school year. Staff members at IS 7 sign a memo agreeing that they have read and understand the regulations. Our staff will be aware of the DOE’s language access resources that will be placed around the school. Our staff is aware that the DOE offers translation services for our parents and will be able to have access to these resources, such as the language line and translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide all above requirements for parental notification for translation and interpretation services by utilizing the translations and making sure they are available at our school. Come September, all new welcome posters will be on display, as well as the parents' Bill of Rights. Parents will have the guide to language access and will always have language ID guides at the main desk and the main office. The ELL teacher will be responsible for making sure all of these elements are in place for parents from the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 77  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to obtain feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, our school will utilize a parent survey in the parents' preferred language. The survey will assess how well the school and teachers have communicated with the parent throughout the year. It will also include how readily available translation services were met throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 78 
