2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R016 School Name: P.S. 016 JOHN J. DRISCOLL Principal: MICHELE RAMOS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information John J. Driscoll 353100010016 Pre-K through 5 th Grades School Number (DBN): 31R016 80 Monroe Ave. Staten Island, N.Y. 10301 718 447-0124 Phone Number: 718-447-5398 Fax: Christine Vigliotti cvigliotti@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Michele Ramos Kathleen Bayer Angela Hadl Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Anne Marie Maresca SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: NancyAlmazo N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, N.Y. 10301 ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  District 31 FSC: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, N.Y. 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-391-6109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Michele Ramos Kathleen Bayer Angela Hadl Anne Marie Maresca Nancy Almazo N/A N/A N/A Rosemarie Parisi Lisa Parente Makeeda Cambell Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher UFTParaprofessional 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Almazo Maria Espinoza Natasha Watler Berline Monroe Stephanie Santiago Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview All staff are dedicated to the intellectual, social and emotional growth of all children throughout our multi-cultural, multi-ethnic school. We will provide the most updated technological tools and the arts to provide challenging, yet enriching educational activities which foster mutual respect for all students and staff in a safe, nurturing learning 2018-19 CEP 9  environment. Parents and guardians provide the first learning experiences for our children and therefore parental involvement will be an integral part of our partnership. Our teaching strategies will empower our children to become lifelong learners and critical thinkers. We are dedicated to providing a nurturing, caring environment where children are supported to develop self-esteem and a sense of responsibility. Our expectations will be for every child to reach their highest potential in order to make positive contributions in our community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual information about your school’s community P.S. 16 is located in a commercial/residential area near the Staten Island Ferry. Centered in "downtown" Staten Island, Borough Hall, the Public Library, the Court Houses, Staten Island Children’s Museum, Staten Island Zoo, and the 120th Precinct are all at our fingertips. We have developed an ongoing relationship with the Staten Island Museum and Snug Harbor Cultural Center. We are one school located within a campus setting. We share facilities with two other elementary schools, one being co-located within our building. The Arts are integral to the learning community at the John J. Driscoll Elementary School. The arts are embedded into the school day in grades K-2 with a cluster visual arts teacher. She will implement the learning standard of the Arts Blue Print through literacy. In grades two and three, students will learn how to play the recorder. In grade three to five, our students will participate in an after school program as part of the Violence and Prevention Grant. Arts Connection dance and drum resident artists will partner with our teachers to instruct students in drums, hip hop dance and hip hop storytelling. The John J. Driscoll Campus Robin Hood Library strives to create a 21st century environment that promotes learning for all students by providing them with the necessary tools and knowledge to access information, teaching information literacy skills, and encouraging lifelong learning. The library media center strives to be a center where students can be creative and grow to have an appreciation of literature, critical thinking skills, and a respect for others and self. Our Dual Language Program serves Pre-K through 5th grade. This program was initiated to meet the needs of the Hispanic subgroup not meeting the AMO. This two-way model integrates native English speakers and native language speakers for all of their content areas of instruction, providing equity of instruction in both languages. All teachers are bilingually certified. The Dual Language Program is departmentalized in grades 3 through 5. The Estrellita program will be incorporated to support early Spanish literacy skills for all students. In addition we provide academic intervention services, Leveled Literacy Program (LLI), to all students who are not meeting grade level standards. After School Programs include the following: o After school ELA and Math enrichment for third, fourth and fifth grade students. o After school Science enrichment for fourth grade students. 2018-19 CEP 10  o After school Art Academy for 3rd , 4th and 5th grade students. o After school Read Program for 1st grade students. o After school Bridging the Gap phonics support for 2nd and 3rd grade students. o After school Academic Intervention Services Level Literacy Program for 2nd and 3rd grade students PS 16 enjoys collaborations with several community-based organizations. P.S. 16 partners with two local colleges, The College of Staten Island and Touro College, to help prepare future teachers. Curriculum In ELA, P.S. 16 is focusing on the progression across the CCLS in order to ensure all students are participating in rigorous instructional practices. After being trained by Paul Bloomberg and The Core Collaborative to ensure that our curriculum maps are addressing priority standards as well as thoughtful pre and post assessments to inform instruction and track progress, teachers will now be collaborating together to continue implementing the strategies that were taken away from their partnership. Throughout the year, teachers will continue to deconstruct the CCLS and planned units of study in order to focus on setting priority standards. They will choose learning intentions grounded in the CCLS, matched with success criteria which allowed students to make their thinking visible and consolidate their learning. The 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade teachers will continue incorporating A.D.D.S (Answer, Detail, Detail, Sentence) in their reading units to support response to literacy. In math, P.S. 16 will continue to use several resources for their math curriculum. Eureka, Go Math, Exemplars and other digital tools will be used in all grades to support and enrich mathematical concepts. The Algebra for All Initiative, one of the eight Equity and Excellence initiatives, will be implemented by the 5th grade teachers in order to improve student readiness for success in Common Core mathematics in middle school. All curriculum materials provide conceptual understanding and are also common core aligned. The programs provide time for whole group instruction, partner work and individual differentiated activities. Throughout the entire math block students are encouraged to explain and discuss their mathematical thinking. To ensure the development of grade appropriate Problem Solving skills we are utilizing the SOLVE method and focusing on the Standards for Mathematical Practices 1, 3, and 6. We will collect, analyze and make decisions based off of the data collected while using the ATLAS. The tool places an emphasis on the integration of the SOLVE method and the three math practices mentioned above. One science specialist teacher focuses on the Science Scope and Sequence, while two additional specialists supplement this instruction using an inquiry-based approach in STEAM - Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Math. The NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence is utilized by the Social Studies specialty teacher as well as classroom teachers embedding this into their literacy work. Though our work with Core Collaborative, we have made a strong push to ensure that our Social Studies maps are not only aligned to the Scope and Sequence, but also have learning intentions which are grounded in the ELA CCLS with matched success criteria. 2018-19 CEP 11  Instructional technology enhances the curriculum in all area of instruction by providing student choice, multiple entry points, and student engagement. All students participate in some form of art, music/movement and physical education. Content Teachers will be working on PBL (Project Based Learning) to implement a hands on approach to learning content through using real world scenarios, challenges, and problems, so they can gain useful knowledge and skills. Teachers will include complex questions or problems to develop and enhance student learning by encouraging critical thinking, problem solving, teamwork and self management. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL students total 26.49% of our population, Students with Disabilities total 28.95%, and Black students total 28.54% . When looking at our June Instructional Report, it is evident that our Special Education classes perform lower in every standard than the city averages in grades 3, 4 and 5. In ELA their specific needs are decoding and comprehending complex texts which are on their grade level. Many of our students are currently reading 1-2 levels below grade expectations. We are addressing this need by reforming the literacy block in the lower grades. K, 1 and 2 teachers will plan their literacy block around building strong reading foundational skills. A staff member who is Orton Gillingham certified has trained our K, 1 and 2 teachers in delivering an intensive, sequential phonics-based system to teach the basics of word formation before whole meanings. Language and sentence stems are utilized to improve expressive comprehension. Anchor charts and graphic organizers to support written comprehension. In math their specific needs are similar to that of ELA. Many of our students struggle to make meaning out of word problems. Many of our students lack a solid base ten number sense which hinders them from making connections among mathematical ideas. In turn, they see these ideas as isolated concepts. In order to increase the amount of opportunities for individualized instruction and intervention, students also engage in strategic math sessions. During these sessions students are grouped based on the findings of various formative assessment strategies and focus on the four mathematical operations, comprehension of word problems, or a particular skill within the unit. Students are provided with math toolkits that have various manipulatives. The toolkits along with the "SOLVE" process has led to an increase in students' ability to solve math problems. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Strengths According to the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation: 1. Using teacher surveys that are tied to Danielson, P.S. 16 has created and obtains a Professional Development Plan that is specific, strategic, and revised based on the expressed needs. By participating in rigorous workshops, teachers can expect that a particular area of Danielson will be the focus of their PD. The PD Plan is varied with facilitators that are teachers, administrators and out of classroom personnel. The curriculum maps are standards based, and focus on priority standards. Teachers write curriculum that matches students' varied needs by planning multiple entry points. The pacing calendar is acting as a guide for teachers to be mindful of their timing and standards. 2. Teachers are working in the Learning Partner Program presenting and visiting schools with a specific focus on the data from the NYSESLAT's listening and speaking. A tracking tool is allowing a deep dive into the identification of subgroups so that their progress can be monitored over the course of the year. Teachers execute lessons that meet the needs of these students. Checklists, rubrics and assessments are used to 2018-19 CEP 12  further analyze growth in students. In addition, teachers track all students reading levels, math competencies and writing standards. Teachers upload their assessments and findings into Google Docs, so that interventions, AIS and student's development can be seen. 3. Systems and structures have been established to support teachers professional development, evaluate and adjust the use of organizational resources, and monitor and support the quality of teacher teams. Through a partnership with P.S. 10 and the Core Collaborative teacher Impact Teams have been created. It was astutely recognized that while teachers understand the rationale and the benefits of success criteria and learning intentions, many unit and lesson plans surfaced the need for teachers to more deeply understand the standards. As an LPP school, teachers reaped the benefits of working with their colleagues across the district through inter-visitations and, as a result have applied to be a "host school" next year. Students are improving in both writing and mathematics. To further support teachers in mathematics instruction, NTN is working with teachers to implement the SOLVE technique with students and the ATLAS protocol with teachers. 4. Common planning time for teachers is provided so that they can work together as well as provide academic intervention support to students in need. 5. Across classes, student work products and discussions are beginning to reflect high levels of student thinking. Students are able to peer and self-assess and genuinely try to help one another. Students are beginning to understand the value of "honest" self-assessment. Students are beginning to identify that they are in the "red" because they are confident that by using progressions and success criteria, they can grow as learners. Key Area of Focus Looking ahead to 2018-2019 P.S. 16 will continue their work with Orton Gillingham lessons, however teachers need to be clear when articulating the correct sounds of letters. Students should be made more aware of why they are studying these sounds. Furthermore when students are placed in differentiated groups they should be made aware of the teacher's purpose for the students being placed in their specific group. Suggestions would be to have students' set goals, teacher sharing his/her thinking for the differentiated groups, and students having some voice in what their next steps would be in ELA. In addition, teachers should visit other schools, such as P.S. 69 for student voice, or P.S. 35 for student goal setting. Continued professional opportunities for teachers to grow in their pedagogical skills in order to promote improved student achievement will continue to be a focus at P.S. 16. In order to continue to improve achievement, teachers will be supported with a variety of resources from both consultants and members of the Field Support Center. There will still be a focus on early childhood in English Language Arts and mathematics, so that students are better prepared to meet the CCLS beginning in grade three. Teachers will continue to be moved in Advance ratings to effective and highly effective, as well as rating some teachers that are not demonstrating pedagogical growth "developing" or "ineffective". 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R016 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 522 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 89 86 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 22 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.6% % Reduced Lunch 26.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 56.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.41 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 64% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 40 89.1% 2.1% 29.1% 29.5% 5.9% 1.3% 4 15% 6.5 20.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students were given the ELA MOSL in September 2017 (BOY) and again in May 2018 (EOY). The same standards were tested on both assessments. Student progress was determined and reflected in the data charts below: Grade 3 ELA # of students 3.L.3.1 3.RI.3.2 3.W.3.1.a 3.W.3.1.b 3.W.3.1.c Grade 3 Beginning of Year MOSL 71 73 End of Year MOSL Progress (+/-) +31% +28% +30.3% +30.9% +31.7% 21.1% 15.8% 28.9% 52.1% 43.8% 59.2% 20.8% 51.7% 16.2% 47.9% In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in  Introduce the topic or text they are writing about, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure that lists reasons.  Ask and answer questions to demonstrate understanding of a text, referring explicitly to the text as the basis for the answers.  Provide reasons that support the opinion. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data:  Use linking words and phrases (e.g., because, therefore, since, for example) to connect opinion and reasons. 2018-19 CEP 15  Determine the main idea of a text; recount the key details and explain how they support the main idea. Grade 4 ELA Grade 4 Beginning of Year MOSL 98 End of Year MOSL # of students 4.L.4.1 4.RI.4.2 4.W.R.1.a 4.W.R.1.b 4.W.R.1.c 30.9% 19.4% 34.9% 101 53.2% 53% 60.9% Progress (+/-) +22.3% +33.6% +26% 25.3% 51% +25.7% 27% 49.8% +22.8% In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Determine the main idea of a text and explain how it is supported by key details; summarize the text.  Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which related ideas are grouped to support the writer's purpose.  Provide reasons that are supported by facts and details. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data: Link opinion and reasons using words and phrases (e.g., for instance, in order to, in addition).   Refer to details and examples in a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text. Grade 5 ELA # of students 5.L.5.1 5.RI.5.2 5.W.5.1.a 5.W.5.1.b 5.W.5.1.c Grade 5 29.3% 36.5% Beginning of Year MOSL 100 101 End of Year MOSL 45.8% Progress (+/-) +12.3% +22.7% +9.3% 36% 48.3% 52% 32.5% 43.8% +11.3% 32% 40.6% +8.6% In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Determine two or more main ideas of a text and explain how they are supported by key details; summarize the text.  Quote accurately from a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text.  Provide logically ordered reasons that are supported by facts and details. 2018-19 CEP 16  The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data:   Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which ideas are logically grouped to support the writer's purpose. Link opinion and reasons using words, phrases, and clauses (e.g., consequently, specifically) ( The information will be updated once the 2017-2018 data is available.) Grade 3 Reading -- Students Tested 96 Standard RI.3.3 RI.3.4 RL3.3 RL3.5 RI.3.1 RI.3.2 RL.3.1 RL3.2 RL3.4 2017 2016 Progress +.14 +.11 +.10 +.03 -.09 50% 40% 55% 62% 47% 64% 32% 46% 49% 36% 29% 45% 59% 56% 65% 55% 64% 61% -.12 -.18 -.01 -.23 According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Describing the relationship between a series of historical events, scientific ideas or concepts, or steps in technical procedures in a text, using language that pertains to time, sequence, and cause/effect.  Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to a grade 3 topic or subject area.  Describe characters in a story (e.g., their traits, motivations, or feelings) and explain how their actions contribute to the sequence of events. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows:  Ask and answer questions to demonstrate understanding of a text, referring explicitly to the text as the basis for the answers (Literature and Informational).  Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, distinguishing literal from nonliteral language. Grade 3 Writing To Sources--- Students Tested 96 Standard RL.3.3 RI.3.8 RL.3.5 2017 2016 Progress +.19 58% 40% 35% 39% 49% 48% -.13 -.09 2018-19 CEP 17  According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Describing characters in a story (e.g., their traits, motivations, or feelings) and explain how their actions contribute to the sequence of events. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows:  Describing the logical connection between particular sentences and paragraphs in a text (e.g., comparison, cause/effect, first/second/third in a sequence).  Refer to parts of stories, dramas, and poems when writing or speaking about a text, using terms such as chapter, scene, and stanza; describe how each successive part builds on earlier sections. Grade 4 Reading -- Students Tested 93 Standard RI.4.1 RI.4.2 RI.4.3 RI.4.4 RI.4.5 RL.4.1 RL.4.4 2017 2016 Progress +.09 .31 .46 -.015 +.12 .46 .31 .46 .48 -.015 -.02 .49 .37 .55 .46 .40 .41 -.01 .33 .27 +.06 According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Referring to details and examples when explaining informational texts.  Describing the overall text structure of events, ideas, or concepts in an informational text.  Determining the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in the text. (Literature) The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows:  Determine the main idea of an informational text and explaining how it is supported by key details.  Determining the meaning of general academic and domain specific vocabulary relevant to grade 4 and/or subject area. Grade 4 Writing--- Students Tested 93 (Writing to Sources) Standard RI.4.1 RL.4.2 RL.4.3 2017 .52 2016 .63 Progress -.11 .30 .58 - .28 .54 .55 -.01 According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students achieved close to the same percentile in:  Writing to describe in depth a character, setting, or event in a story or drama, drawing on specific details in the text (e.g., a character’s thoughts, words, or actions). The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 18   Writers refer to details and examples in a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text.  Writers determine the theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text; summarize the text. Grade 5 Reading -- Students Tested 100 Standard RI.5.4 RL.5.1 RL.5.2 RI.5.2 RL.5.4 RL.5.6 2017 2016 Progress +16 +21 46% 57% 52% 53% 40% 49% 30% 36% 41% 64% 59% 72% -23 +11 -11 -19 According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Determining the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases.  Quoting accurately from a text when explaining what the text says and when drawing inferences from the text.  Determining the theme of a story from details in the text.  Understanding of how a character in a story responds to challenges. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows:  Determining two or more main ideas of a text and explain how they are supported by key details.  Determine the meaning of words and phrases in a text including figurative language.  Describe how a narrator’s point of view influences how events are described. Grade 5 Writing To Sources- Students Tested 100 Standard RL.5.4 RI.5.2 RL.5.3 2017 2016 Progress +12 59% 58% 47% 65% -13 .49% .61% -12 According to the Common Core State Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text including figurative language. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data are as follows:  Compare and contrast two or more characters, setting or events while drawing on specific details.  Determine two or more main ideas and explain how they are supported by the key details in the text. Math MOSL Data 2017-2018 Students were given the Math MOSL in September 2017 (BOY) and again in May 2018 (EOY). The same standards were tested on both assessments. Student progress was determined and reflected in the data charts below: Grade 3 Math Grade 3 # of students 3.NBT.3 3.NF.1 3.NF.3 3.OA.3 3.OA.8 2018-19 CEP 19  Beginning of Year MOSL 73 73 Progress (+/-) +13.7% +20.2% +17.1% +25.1% +19.2% 32.4% 22.6% 18.2% 23.3% 38.8% 46.1% 42.8% 35.3% 48.4% 58% End of Year MOSL In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Understanding a fraction 1/b as the quantity formed by 1 part when a whole is partitioned into b equal parts; understand a fraction a/b as the quantity formed by a parts of size 1/b.  Using multiplication and division within 100 to solve word problems in situations involving equal groups,  arrays, and measurement quantities, e.g., by using drawings and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem. Solving two-step word problems using the four operations. Representing these problems using equations with a letter standing for the unknown quantity. Assessing the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies including rounding. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data:  Multiplying one-digit whole numbers by multiples of 10 in the range 10–90 (e.g., 9 × 80, 5 × 60) using strategies based on place value and properties of operations.  Explaining equivalence of fractions in special cases, and compare fractions by reasoning about their size. Grade 4 Math Grade 4 # of students 4.NBT.5 4.NBT.6 4.NF.2 4.NF.3c 4.OA.3 Beginning of Year MOSL 98 End of Year MOSL 29.9% 34.7% 30.3% 20.4% 35% 56.8% 46.5% 45.2% 36.4% 53.1% 101 Progress (+/-) +26.9% +11.8% +14.9% +16.0% +18.1% In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Multiplying a whole number of up to four digits by a one-digit whole number, and multiply two two-digit numbers, using strategies based on place value and the properties of operations. Illustrate and explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models.  Understanding a fraction a/b with a > 1 as a sum of fractions 1/b. Solving word problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions referring to the same whole and having like denominators, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. Solving multi-step word problems posed with whole numbers and having whole-number answers using the four operations, including problems in which remainders must be interpreted. Representing these problems using equations with a letter standing for the unknown quantity. Assessing the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies including rounding.  The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data: 2018-19 CEP 20   Finding whole-number quotients and remainders with up to four-digit dividends and one-digit divisors, using strategies based on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrating and explaining the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models.  Comparing two fractions with different numerators and different denominators, e.g., by creating common denominators or numerators, or by comparing to a benchmark fraction such as 1/2. Recognizing that comparisons are valid only when the two fractions refer to the same whole. Record the results of comparisons with symbols >, =, or <, and justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model. Grade 5 Math Grade 5 # of students 5.MD.2 5.NBT.7 5.NF.4a 5.NF.6 5.NF.7c Beginning of Year MOSL 97 99 Progress (+/-) +17.0% +4.3% +15.1% +4.6% +10.9% 23.7% 40.5% 33% 38.5% 22.2% 40.7% 44.8% 48.1% 43.1% 33.1% End of Year MOSL In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Add, subtract, multiply, and divide decimals to hundredths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used. Interpret the product (a/b) × q as a parts of a partition of q into b equal parts; equivalently, as the result of a sequence of operations a × q ÷ b. For example, use a visual fraction model to show (2/3) × 4 = 8/3, and create a story context for this equation. Do the same with (2/3) × (4/5) = 8/15. (In general, (a/b) × (c/d) = (ac)/(bd). Solve real world problems involving multiplication of fractions and mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem.   The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 school MOSL data:  Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Use operations on  fractions for this grade to solve problems involving information presented in line plots. For example, given different measurements of liquid in identical beakers, find the amount of liquid each beaker would contain if the total amount in all the beakers were redistributed equally. Solve real world problems involving division of unit fractions by non-zero whole numbers and division of whole numbers by unit fractions, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. For example, how much chocolate will each person get if 3 people share 1/2 lb of chocolate equally? How many 1/3-cup servings are in 2 cups of raisins? ( This information will be updated once the 2017-2018 State data is available) Students were assessed using the New York State Common Core Mathematics Assessment. (2016-2017) 2018-19 CEP 21  Grade 3 2015-2016 2016-2017 94 Progress # of students 3.NF.1 3.NF.2a 3.NF.3a 3.OA.4 3.MD.6 3.MD.7a .59 .75 +.16 .32 .26 -.06 .32 .22 -.10 .50 .69 +.19 .82 .69 -.13 .46 .85 +.39 *Average of total possible points In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Understand a fraction 1/b as the quantity formed by 1 part when a whole is partitioned into b equal parts; understand a fraction a/b as the quantity formed by a parts of size 1/b.  Determine the unknown whole number in a multiplication or division equation relating three whole numbers. For example, determine the unknown number that makes the equation true in each of the equations 8 × ? = 48, 5 = _ ÷ 3, 6 × 6 = ?  Relate area to the operations of multiplication and addition. a. Find the area of a rectangle with whole-number side lengths by tiling it, and show that the area is the same as would be found by multiplying the side lengths. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data:  Explain equivalence of fractions in special cases, and compare fractions by reasoning about their size. a. Understand two fractions as equivalent (equal) if they are the same size, or the same point on a number line.  Understand a fraction as a number on the number line; represent fractions on a number line diagram. a. Represent a fraction 1/b on a number line diagram by defining the interval from 0 to 1 as the whole and partitioning it into b equal parts. Recognize that each part has size 1/b and that the endpoint of the part based at 0 locates the number 1/b on the number line.  Measure areas by counting unit squares (square cm, square m, square in, square ft, and improvised units).  # of students 4.G.A.1 4.MD.C.6 4.OA.A.3 4.MD.B.4 4.MD.C.5 4.OA.A.1 Grade 4 2015-2016 2016-2017 95 Progress .60 .46 -.14 .58 .47 -.11 .58 .16 -.42 .38 .55 +.17 .42 .74 +.32 .54 .92 +.38 *Average of total possible points In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Solve problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions by using information presented in line plots. For example, from a line plot find and interpret the difference in length between the longest and shortest specimens in an insect collection.  Recognize angles as geometric shapes that are formed wherever two rays share a common endpoint, and understand concepts of angle measurement:  Interpret a multiplication equation as a comparison, e.g., interpret 35 = 5 × 7 as a statement that 35 is 5 times as many as 7 and 7 times as many as 5. Represent verbal statements of multiplicative comparisons as multiplication equations. 2018-19 CEP 22  The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data:  Draw points, lines, line segments, rays, angles (right, acute, obtuse), and perpendicular and parallel lines. Identify these in two-dimensional figures.  Measure angles in whole-number degrees using a protractor. Sketch angles of specified measure.  Solve multi-step word problems posed with whole numbers and having whole-number answers using the four operations, including problems in which remainders must be interpreted. Represent these problems using equations with a letter standing for the unknown quantity. Assess the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies including rounding. Grade 5 2015-2016 2016-2017 100 Progress # of students 5.MD.3b 5.MD.4 5.MD.5b 5.NF.3 5.OA.1 5.NF.6 .38 .61 +.23 .35 .60 +.25 .57 .58 +.01 .54 .76 .32 .36 +.04 +.22 .05 .14 +.09 *Average of total possible points In relation to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students did well in:  Use parentheses, brackets, or braces in numerical expressions, and evaluate expressions with these symbols.  Measure volumes by counting unit cubes, using cubic cm, cubic in, cubic ft, and improvised units.  Recognize volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement. A solid figure which can be packed without gaps or overlaps using n unit cubes is said to have a volume of n cubic units. The needs of our students based on our analysis of the 2016-2017 school data:   Relate volume to the operations of multiplication and addition and solve real world and mathematical problems involving volume. Apply the formulas V = l × w × h and V = b × h for rectangular prisms to find volumes of right rectangular prisms with whole-number edge lengths in the context of solving real world and mathematical problems. Interpret a fraction as division of the numerator by the denominator (a/b = a ÷ b). Solve word problems involving division of whole numbers leading to answers in the form of fractions or mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem. For example, interpret 3/4 as the result of dividing 3 by 4, noting that 3/4 multiplied by 4 equals 3, and that when 3 wholes are shared equally among 4 people each person has a share of size 3/4. If 9 people want to share a 50-pound sack of rice equally by weight, how many pounds of rice should each person get? Between what two whole numbers does your answer lie? Solve real world problems involving multiplication of fractions and mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 23  By June 2019, as a result of rigorous instruction in ELA and Math there will be a 5%(from - to -) increase in the percentage of students reaching proficiency (level 3 and above) on the NYS ELA and NYS Math exam as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Quality Guide. all students in grades 3 through grade 5 will demonstrate progress by achieving a 5% increase in the level 3 on the New York State Language Arts and Math Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, paraprofessionals, and students (SWD,ENL,GE) Teachers and Administrators Sept. to June (2 periods weekly during common planning and Mondays during PD time  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers, and Special Education providers will engage in grade level curriculum mapping to embed higher order thinking strategies, questions, and tasks. This work will be focused around the progression of the common core standards. Teachers will promote classroom discussion, provide differentiated instruction with exemplars, Guided Reading during small group instruction,Strategic Math instruction, technology resources and real world problems in order to provide all students with multiple entry points. ENL and Special Education providers will create differentiated instruction that will connect the content, process, and product to provide ENL and SWD multiple opportunities to be academically successful. Students will be provided with tool kits, checklists and self-reflection rubrics to promote student centered learning. In order to express comprehension of content, 2018-19 CEP 25  ENL and SWD will be provided with language prompts for discussion and sentence stems for writing to foster oral and written academic language. Content Teachers will be working on PBL (Project Based Learning) to implement a hands on approach to learning content through using real world scenarios, challenges, and problems so they can gain useful knowledge and skills. Teachers will include complex questions or problems to develop and enhance student learning by encouraging critical thinking, problem solving, teamwork and self management. Paraprofessionals will engage in online professional development using TEQ online and differentiated PD opportunities, based on need, in order to deepen their understanding of research-based instructional strategies that impact student learning. In turn, paraprofessionals will support classroom teachers by engaging ENL and SWD with differentiated groups, such as, guided reading, Strategic Math, Reading Rescue, and differentiated phonics lessons (Orton-Gillingham). Content Teachers Sept. to June , twice per month during Monday PD. Content Teachers and Administrators Twice per month Skype sessions All paraprofessionals One Monday per month during Monday PD time, September to June TEQ Online After school enrichment program in ELA and Math for 3-5 grade students. Selected Students (SWD,GE) October to March one 90 minute after school session per week. After school enrichment program in ELA and Math for 3-5 grade ENL students. Selected ENL students October to March one 90 minute after school session per week. At-risk 1st graders October to March one 90 minute after school session per week. After school Bridging the Gap for 2nd and 3rd grade students. GE, ENL and SWD will be engaging in phonics activities and tasks that will enrich their language, reading, and comprehension skills. Select Teachers and Administrators Select Teachers and Administrators Select Teachers and Administrators 2018-19 CEP 26 After school Bridging the Gap for 2nd and 3rd grade students. Students (SWD,ENL,GE) October to March one 90 minute after school session per week. Select Teachers and Administrators All students and parents One 50 minute classroom visit in the Fall and Spring Teachers and Administrators All parents and students Once a month families will receive a grade specific newsletter informing them of the month's events and curriculum content. Teachers and Administrators Families will be invited to Parent as Partners in Education sessions to learn about common core aligned instruction in ELA and Math ENL and SWD parents will be invited into the classrooms to participate and observe ENL and SWD teachers instruct differentiated math and ELA curriculum based lessons. Newsletters will be made according to units of studies in order to inform parents on the work the children will be completing. Newsletters will be translated for ENL students and parents. Also, the newsletter will provide links and resources that will help parent’s provide ENL and SWD with additional academic support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. PS 16 will hold a back to school night in September to share the curriculum across the grades. Parents meet in the auditorium to get an overview of school expectations from the administrative staff. Parents then break into smaller groups to meet with classroom teachers. The classroom teachers share their strategies and opportunities for parent collaboration. 2. Classroom and out of classroom teachers will use email and communication systems daily, such as DOJO and REMIND, to provide quick feedback to parents for their child. Teachers will also be able to receive these same communications back from parents in order for their to be open communication. Parents can find notices and homework in their child’s backpack on a daily basis. 3. Parent Newsletters created collaboratively by classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers are sent home at the beginning of each month for grades PreK-5 which include grade specific information pertaining to the child’s learning that month. The newsletters provide an update on topics and strategies that the students will be engaged in during the upcoming weeks. Parents then have an opportunity to share in the student’s learning by being more familiar with what is happening in the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 27  4. “Pastries with the Principal” is a monthly event that occurs on Thursday morning once a month. It is an informal gathering during which parents have an opportunity to meet with the principal and other parents. There is no agenda and parents can ask questions or offer suggestions regarding all areas of the school. The dates are sent home to parents as a flyer at the beginning of the month, placed on the school calendar and also displayed on the school website. 5. The Parent Coordinator creates a parent distribution list at the beginning of the the school year, where she communicates all school events. This list is updated every month to include new contacts or any changes that need to be made. 6. Parent bulletin boards and posters are created by the Parent Coordinator weekly and posted on and near the entrances advertising upcoming events. 7. Upcoming events are tweeted by administration and other staff members weekly in order to keep parents and outside community members up to date with what is going on at school. 8. The parent coordinator maintains a folder in the main office that includes all flyers sent home to parents that pertain to advertising school activities. This folder is added to on a weekly basis when new flyers are created. 9. The parent coordinator posts upcoming school events monthly on the the school calendar, school website and by flyer sent home in backpacks both monthly and weekly. These events include Male Role Model Day on 9/29, Pajama Night on 10/20, two Arts & Crafts Nights on 12/8 and 4/20, Multicultural Night on 3/23, Zumba Night on 5/16 and Celebration of Arts on 5/24. 10. The Cookshop program, sponsored by the NYC Food Bank, is implemented by the parent coordinator and a teacher. Parents and students are taught cooking as well as basic nutritional skills and supplied with food and materials to support the program. These parent workshops with meet once a month and dates will be included on the school calendar, school website and through a flyer sent home by backpack. 11. Celebrations of students are held once a month by administration in the auditorium. During the celebrations, students are honored for progress in any academic or social area decided on by classroom teachers and school staff. In addition, individual classes perform or present a piece of work that they are proud of. Parents are invited to the celebrations monthly by receiving a flyer home 2 weeks before the event. 12. Classroom teachers will establish class parents in order to give parents an opportunity to volunteer in their child’s classroom and school wide events. These opportunities will be sent home as a flyer and monitored through sign-in sheets available when the parents enter the child’s class. 13. After school homework help for parents and their children will be available twice a week from 2:45 to 3:45 October thru June in the Library. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher salaries, administrator salaries, professional books, teacher and administrator per session for after school program and teacher Per Diem for planning and preparation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students in grades K through 5 will demonstrate progress by achieving a 2% increase in text level on the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments. In the NYC MOY ELA and Math Task, students will achieve a 2% level in all reading and math trait indicators on the rubric. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Assessment Tool Kit, NYC MOY ELA and Math Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? (This information will be updated once 2017-2018 data is available.) : School Strengths: 1.4 - Positive Learning Environment - Proficient 1. The school coordinates social emotional learning through a team building activity daily called harmony to promote positive interactions for the academic school day. 2. The school community aligns professional development, family outreach, and student learning experience and supports to promote the adoption of academic and personal behavior. 3.4 - High Expectations - Proficient 1. Schools leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and provide training and have a system of accountability for those expectations. 2. teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicate high expectations for all students and offer ongoing and detailed feedback and guidance/advisement supports that prepare students for the next level. School Needs: 1. Decrease the amount of Levels 1-5 Incident and suspension occurrences by the adults recognizing disruptive behavior as social/emotional learning opportunities. Data: 2015-2016- 209 incidents 2016-2017- 190 incidents Decrease of 19 incidents 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of incidents and suspensions will decrease by 15% on the 1-5 Incident and Suspension Report from the Office of Safety and Youth Development. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  A behavior management specialist will work with classroom teachers to implement positive behavior strategies. GE, ENL, and, Special Education providers willutilize various types of positive reinforcement strategies.For example, token boards. Class Dojo, raffle tickets, dailyself-assessment checklists, and praise will be used to encourage a positive classroom environment. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers During Monday PD once per month Operation Respect Staff,School Guidance Counselor, Administrators All classroom will participate in a team building activity called Harmony to promote positive interactions for the academic school day. ENL and SWD providers will utilize Teachers and Students (SWD,ENL,GE) Daily from 8:20-8:45 Sept. -June Administrators and Teachers language stems to encourage students to verbalize their thoughts and feelings in a positive manner. During this time, SWD will be taught proper coping mechanisms when dealing with feelings of frustration and anger. Guidance counselor will facilitate counseling sessions for mandated and “at risk” students in order to provide them with coping and resilience strategies as well as whole classes based on needs assessment(conflict resolution,homelessness) SAPIS worker will facilitate sessions for students in grades 3-5. Weekly sessions will address ways students can express themselves in a positive manner. They will also learn life skills that will guide them in becoming productive members of the community. Guidance Counselor Mandated and At-risk students (GE, ENL, and SWD) Weekly sessions as per IEP for mandated students and 6-8 week cycles of group sessions for at-risk. Students in Grades 3-5 Once per week SAPIS worker Parent workshops will be conducted on student behaviors that lead to success in school and life and how to nurture and support these behaviors. Parents Guidance Counselor, Administration Once per month on Tuesdays from 2:45-3:55 2018-19 CEP 32 The creation of a discipline/PBIS team to implement strategies that define and support targeted student behaviors. There was a student/ teacher buddy system.with multiple checking a day. Anecdotals were kept on a consistent basis. Teachers Once per month on Tuesdays 3:15-3:55 Administration, Teachers, paraprofessional, School Aides Guidance counselor, STH social worker, and paraprofessional will facilitate Girl's and Boy's Club to provide students with coping and resilience strategies. Selected Students (SWD,ENL,GE) 3 Groups of 10 participate in 8 week cycles. Guidance Counselor, STH Social Worker, Operation Respect Staff, Assistant Principal, Paraprofessional 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be conducted by the Parent Coordinator, school staff, administration or other CBO’s, on student behaviors that lead to success in school and life and how to nurture and support these behaviors. These workshops will be held monthly throughout the school year following PTA meetings or other scheduled times before, during or after school. These workshops include Transitioning to PreK on 9/18, a two part Middle School Process Workshop on 10/9 and 11/27, Immigration Rights workshop given by Project Hospitality and El Centro de Imigracion given during 2 afternoon sessions and 1 morning session, and a Health and Wellness workshop. PS 16 will hold a back to school night on September 13th, to share the curriculum across the grades. Parents meet in the auditorium to get an overview of school expectations from the administrative staff. Parents then break into smaller groups to meet with classroom teachers. The classroom teachers share their strategies and opportunities for parent collaboration. Classroom and out of classroom teachers will use email and communication systems daily, such as DOJO and REMIND, to provide quick feedback to parents for their child. Teachers will also be able to receive these same communications back from parents in order for their to be open communication. Parents can find notices and homework in their child’s backpack on a daily basis. Parent Newsletters are sent home with grade specific information on alternating months. The newsletters provide an update on topics and strategies with which the students will be engaged during the upcoming weeks. Parents then have an opportunity to share in the student’s learning. “Pastries with the Principal” is a monthly event that occurs every Thursday morning of the month. It is an informal gathering during which parents have an opportunity to meet with the principal and other parents. There is no agenda and parents can ask questions or offer suggestions regarding all areas of the school. The dates are sent home to parents as a flyer at the beginning of the month, placed on the school calendar and also displayed on the school website. The Parent Coordinator will create a parent distribution list where she will communicate all school events. Posters will be created and posted on entrances advertising upcoming events on a regular basis. 2018-19 CEP 33  Upcoming events are tweeted by administration and other staff members weekly in order to keep parents and outside community members up to date with what is going on at school. The parent coordinator maintains a folder in the main office that includes all flyers sent home to parents that pertain to advertising school activities. This folder is added to on a weekly basis when new flyers are created The parent coordinator posts upcoming school events monthly on the the school calendar, school website and by flyer sent home in backpacks both monthly and weekly. These events include Male Role Model Day on 9/28, Pajama Night on 10/19, two Arts & Crafts Nights on 12/7 and 4/19, Multicultural Night on 3/22, and Celebration of Arts on 5/24. The Cookshop program, sponsored by the NYC Food Bank, is implemented by the parent coordinator and a teacher. Parents and students are taught cooking as well as basic nutritional skills and supplied with food and materials to support the program. These parent workshops with meet once a month and dates will be included on the school calendar, school website and through a flyer sent home by backpack. Celebrations of students are held once a month by administration in the auditorium. Grades K-2 at 9:00 am and Grades 3-5 at 1:50. During the celebrations, students are honored for progress in any academic or social area decided on by classroom teachers and school staff. One student from each celebration is randomly selected to receive a new bicycle. In addition, individual classes perform or present a piece of work that they are proud of. Parents are invited to the celebrations monthly by receiving a flyer home 2 weeks before the event. Establish classroom parents to give parents an opportunity to volunteer in their child’s classroom and school-wide events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Counselor from Operation Respect Violence Prevention Program, guidance counselor salary, resident artist from Arts Connection, teacher and administrator per session, materials and books Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 25% decrease in school occurrences as reported by OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs reports 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. (This information will be updated once 2017-2018 Date is available) Based on the results for the 2016-2017 School Learning Environment Survey Strengths: 97% of teachers and parents feel all students are represented in the curriculum. Instruction is designed and modified to address students' cultural backgrounds in order to make learning more meaningful. Materials are included to a meet the needs of all students in the school. 94% of teachers feel that they are provided with quality professional development that enhances their learning, development and teacher effectiveness. 88% of teachers feel the school is committed to long term, focused professional development, which will influence student achievement. 96% of teachers feel they are given opportunities to collaborate and common plan with peers in their own school, as well as, other schools. Needs Teachers need to implement new pedagogical approaches addressed during professional development to promote conceptual understanding. Teachers need to identify the entry point for all students in order to move them along the continuum. Students need to be given the opportunity to explore and discover new ideas through problem based tasks in a student centered environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 36  By June 2019, 80% of teachers will adjust their practices to promote conceptual understanding in a student-led classroom environment measured by advance evaluations. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in ongoing professional development in writing, provided by Erik Lepis of Living Literacy, to enable teachers to unpack CCLS to create deeper understanding and create unit plans that coincide with the writing progressions and the NY curriculum. In addition, teachers will design and implement student-centered learning through the use of writing progressions, shared writing, and self and peer assessments, while providing multiple entry points for all. Furthermore, SWD and ENL will be provided with sentence stems, anchor charts, visuals, graphic organizers, and modeled writing pieces, to ensure student achievement. Selected Teachers, Students ( SWD, ENL,GE) Teachers will promote classroom discussion, provide differentiated instruction with exemplars, Guided Reading during small group instruction,Strategic Math instruction, technology resources and real world problems in order to provide all students with multiple entry points. Students will be provided with tool kits, checklists and self-reflection rubrics to promote student centered learning. Selected Teachers, Students ( SWD, ENL,GE) SWD and ENL will be grouped heterogeneously throughout small group instruction to foster academic and social growth. The School-wide Impact Team will meet to design school-wide inquiry cycles, across content areas. To maximize this work, there will be a book study using Paul Bloomberg’s book: Impact Teams. We will develop cycles of learning to support instructional practices that will provide ENL and SWD students with appropriate entry points to increase student self assessment and achievement. We will not only decide on ways to have quality inquiry cycles, but also targeted lesson study inter-visitations. Selected Teachers, Students ( SWD, ENL,GE) Consultant and administrators Administrators One full day of PD in Oct., Nov., and Dec. Two days will be added in the spring depending upon budget. During weekly common planning or Monday PD time Sept. to June Administrators As host school for the Learning Partners program, P.S. 16 teachers will collaborate with P.S. 68 and P.S. 44 to support ENL, SWD, and GE students in improving academic conversation and academic vocabulary in order to improve reading and writing. Selected Teachers, Students ( SWD, ENL,GE) Nine full PD days- 3 days at PS 16, 3 days at PS 22, and 3 Teachers, administrators, and LPP Team 2018-19 CEP 38 days at PS 41. Daily during Literacy and Math block from Sept. to June Daily Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Administrators Classroom teachers Students (SWD, ENL,GE) Classroom teachers Students (SWD, ENL,GE) Classroom teachers Students (SWD, ENL,GE) Selected teachers Students (SWD, ENL,GE) All teachers Students (SWD, ENL,GE) Three full days of PD Living Literacy Consultant and administrators Half day PD once per month Voyager Sopris Learning Consultant and administrator Teachers and Administrators Daily during Literacy and Math block from Sept. to June This will be achieved through lab-site inter visitations, book study, and professional development Teachers will engage in inquiry to analyze student work, determine trends, and adjust instruction in order to provide all students with appropriate entry points to further their learning. P.S. 16 will be a lab site for Advanced Literacies instruction. In order to design rigorous instruction to support linguistically diverse learners, advanced literacy focuses on the five hallmarks of instruction. This includes texts with rich content and big ideas, discussions to build language and knowledge, use of extended writing to build language and knowledge, small set of high utility vocabulary words to master content and language, and school wide protocols to support reading, writing, speaking and listening. P.S. 16 will use assessments efficiently and purposefully to guide instruction and build academic success. We will accomplish this through ongoing teacher PDs that support all teachers’ practice (guided reading, math, writing, Orton Gillingham). GE, ENL, and special education providers will engage in ongoing professional development led by Erik Lepis, Living Literacy consultant, with a focus on refining Guided Reading Instruction. Teachers will participate in the Step Up to Writing pilot, supporting process writing and reading response during writer's workshop in grades K-5. Teachers will promote student centered learning through the use of color coded writing progression checklists, color coded modeled writing, and self and peer assessment. All students will be provided with tool kits, checklists and self- reflection rubrics. ENL and special education providers will ensure student success by supporting ENL and SWD with multiple visuals, anchor charts, sentence stems, exemplars, and mentor texts. 2018-19 CEP 39  The school will engage in Parent Partners in Education. Parents will be welcomed into classrooms to observe and or participate in their child's learning. A debrief session following the observation will take place to discuss their observations while receiving clarification and support, allowing them to assist their child through the learning process. Parents, Students (SWD, ENL, GE) One 60 minute session in the Fall and in the Spring Teachers and administrators ENL, special education, and GE teachers will engage in ongoing professional development led by the National Training Network with a focus on Problem Solving using the SOLVE method and the Standards for Mathematical Practices 1, 3, and 6. The school will collect, analyze and make decisions based on data collected using the provided ATLAS tool which focuses on the integration of SOLVE and the three math practices mentioned above (SMPs 1, 3 and 6). ENL and special education providers will support ENL and SWD through differentiated instruction. Classroom teachers Students ( SWD, ENL,GE) Gr. K-2 Cycle 1: Nov. 2 National Training Network Consultant, Administration, Teachers Cycle 2: Jan. 11 Cycle 3: Mar.27 Cycle 4: May 9 Gr. 3-5 Cycle 1: Oct. 27 Cycle 2: Nov. 10 Cycle 3: Nov. 16 Cycle 4: Jan 26 Cycle 5: Mar. 14 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. PS 16 will hold a back to school night on September 13th to share the curriculum across the grades. Parents meet in the auditorium to get an overview of school expectations from the Principal and Assistant Principals. Parents will then break into smaller groups to meet with individual classroom teachers. The classroom 2018-19 CEP 40  teachers will share their strategies and opportunities for parent collaboration and student expectations for the coming school year. 2. Classroom and out of classroom teachers will use email and communication systems daily, such as DOJO and REMIND, to provide quick feedback to parents for their child. Teachers will also be able to receive these same communications back from parents in order for their to be open communication. Parents can find notices and homework in their child’s backpack on a daily basis. 3. Parent Newsletters created collaboratively by classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers are sent home at the beginning of each month for grades Pre K-5 which include grade specific information pertaining to the child’s learning that month. The newsletters provide an update on topics and strategies that the students will be engaged in during the upcoming weeks. Parents then have an opportunity to share in the student’s learning by being more familiar with what is happening in the classroom. 4. “Pastries with the Principal” is a monthly event providing an informal gathering during which parents have an opportunity to meet with the principal and other parents. There is no agenda and parents can ask questions or offer suggestions regarding all areas of the school. The dates are sent home to parents as a flyer at the beginning of the month, placed on the school calendar and also displayed on the school website. 5. The Parent Coordinator creates a parent distribution list at the beginning of the the school year, where she communicates all school events. This list is updated every month to include new contacts or any changes that need to be made. 6. Parent bulletin boards and posters are created by the Parent Coordinator weekly and posted on and near the entrances advertising upcoming events. 7. Upcoming events are tweeted and posted on Facebook by all administration and other staff members in order to keep parents and community members up to date with what is happening at the school. This is a venue for highlighting student achievement at PS 16. 8. The parent coordinator maintains a folder in the main office that includes all flyers sent home to parents that pertain to advertising school activities. This folder is added to on a weekly basis as new leaflets are created. 9. Hero and Me. The Hero and Me program invites fathers, grandfathers, uncles or other adult male relatives to join in an 8 week program with their children. The Staten Island Community Partnership has funded the activities which include fun filled workshops, a free trip with t-shirts for the male role model and the PS 16 student and an ending ceremony. Hot meals are served to participants at every meeting. 10. Homework help provides support to parents and students on Wednesday and Thursday, after school. Students and parents are assisted by teachers to complete homework. (October-June 2:45-3:45 in school library) 11. Assembly programs are periodically presented in the auditorium by students and outside partnerships. Parents are invited whenever students are performing or honored. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this 2018-19 CEP 41  action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to maximize resources, allocations will specified to support the school wide instructional goals. Allocations from Vision for School Improvement will support the consultant fee for Core Collaborative and teacher Per Diem for Professional Development. In addition, teacher salaries, administrator salaries, and 2018-19 CEP 42  academic intervention services for daytime small group instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will be effective or highly effective. This can be monitored through Danielson 3B, 3C and 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson 3B, 3C, and 3D. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of teacher observation data revealed that all teachers were observed in a timely manner, including beginning and end of year conferences. Teachers also received feedback in a timely manner to assist in their professional growth. Strengths Observations conducted in a timely manner Feedback given to all teachers in a timely manner Feedback is specific to the teachers’ needs Needs Provide teachers with more examples of exemplary practices that result in student learning Provide teachers with targeted feedback and next steps that improves student learning outcomes Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will earn a “well-developed” on indicator 1.2 ( Instructional Core) as measure by the Principal Performance Overview. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will provide teachers with focused feedback on higher order thinking strategies Create a Google Docs document to track strengths and needs of individual teachers Monthly meetings to review observations by the administration to identify school, grade, and individual trends Administrators will provide teachers with resources, such as professional development and professional reading pertaining to questioning, ELL scaffolding and classroom discussion to support their pedagogy. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? GE/Sp.Ed Classroom, ENL, and Cluster Teachers GE/Sp.Ed Classroom, ENL, and Cluster Teachers GE/Sp.Ed Classroom, ENL, and Cluster Teachers GE/Sp.Ed Classroom, ENL, and Cluster Teachers IPC Sept. -Oct. Administrators From Sept. to June Administrators Administrators Administrators Once per month during common planning or Monday PD Various Scheduled Full and Half day PD in addition to Monday afternoons How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 16 will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and promote parent leadership to support their children at home by the following: On September 13, 2018, we will have our first back to school evening. On this night, the Principal and Assistant Principals will provide parents/guardians with the various opportunities made available for them to be parent leaders 2018-19 CEP 45  and engaged in their child’s academic work. This will allow them to support students at home throughout the school year. These opportunities will include: 1. Monthly newsletters will be created collaboratively by classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers for grades PreK-5 to communicate content and strategies students are working on in class and during out of class/prep time. 2. Parent emails/online communication systems, such as DOJO or Remind, will be available for use daily or weekly based on the need from classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers. This form of communication will be used to keep parents/guardians engaged in the child’s academic work or behavior needs. 3. Writing celebrations at the end of a unit will be held every 3 months for parents/guardians to visit their child’s class to see what students have done throughout the writing process. Parent Coordinator will send out a flyer announcing when the celebrations will occur and dates will be included on the school calendar. Classroom teachers will host the celebrations in their class. 5. Afterschool homework help for parents and their children will be available twice a week from 2:45-3:45 October-June in the School Library. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrator salaries, day time Per Diem for inter-visitations, professional development and inquiry work around student work samples and teacher observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Advance tool will reflect 50% or 96 observations completed with at least 2/3 (64) of the observations reflecting an effective or highly effective rating. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance tools specifically Domains 3b, 3c, and 3d. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. (This information will be updated once 2017-2018 data is available.) The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey was completed by 45% of parents. According to the survey, 95% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs and 92% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Only 68% of parents indicated that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school( for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc). Efforts need to be refined allowing parents to have better access to volunteer their time at PS 16. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% or more of the parents will respond on the indicator of the School Learning Survey that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent coordinator will create a parent distribution list where she will communicate all school events. Parents Posters will be created and posted on entrances advertising upcoming events. Parents Parent coordinator will post upcoming school events, such as Movie Night, Pajama Night, Game Night, Arts & Crafts night and the Arts Celebration, on school’s Twitter account and school website. Parents Parent Coordinator Parents Coordinator and school aides Parent Coordinator School calendar will be shared with parents at the beginning of each month. Post on Main entrance, Pre-K entrance and exits to one week prior to scheduled event One Friday evening per month from 5-6:30 from Sept. to June Parent coordinator will tweet upcoming events on the school’s Twitter account. Parents Sept.-June Establish class parent volunteers for all classrooms. Parents Sept.-June Parent Coordinator and principal Parent Coordinator and principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1. PS 16 will hold a back to school night on September 13th to share the curriculum across the grades. Parents meet in the auditorium to get an overview of school expectations from the Principal and Assistant Principals. Parents will then break into smaller groups to meet with individual classroom teachers. The classroom 2018-19 CEP 48  teachers will share their strategies and opportunities for parent collaboration and student expectations for the coming school year. 2. Classroom and out of classroom teachers will use email and communication systems daily, such as DOJO and REMIND, to provide quick feedback to parents for their child. Teachers will also be able to receive these same communications back from parents in order for their to be open communication. Parents can find notices and homework in their child’s backpack on a daily basis. 3. Parent Newsletters created collaboratively by classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers are sent home at the beginning of each month for grades PreK-5 which include grade specific information pertaining to the child’s learning that month. The newsletters provide an update on topics and strategies that the students will be engaged in during the upcoming weeks. Parents then have an opportunity to share in the student’s learning by being more familiar with what is happening in the classroom. 4. “Pastries with the Principal” is a monthly event that occurs every Thursday morning of the month. It is an informal gathering during which parents have an opportunity to meet with the principal and other parents. There is no agenda and parents can ask questions or offer suggestions regarding all areas of the school. The dates are sent home to parents as a flyer at the beginning of the month, placed on the school calendar and also displayed on the school website. 5. The Parent Coordinator creates a parent distribution list at the beginning of the the school year, where she communicates all school events. This list is updated every month to include new contacts or any changes that need to be made. 6. Parent bulletin boards and posters are created by the Parent Coordinator weekly and posted on and near the entrances advertising upcoming events. 7. Upcoming events are tweeted by all administration and other staff members in order to keep parents and community members up to date with what is happening at the school. 8. The parent coordinator maintains a folder in the main office that includes all flyers sent home to parents that pertain to advertising school activities. This folder is added to on a weekly basis when new flyers are created. 9. The parent coordinator posts upcoming school events monthly on the the school calendar, school website and by flyer sent home in backpacks. These events include Male Role Model Day on 9/28, Pajama Night on 10/19, two Arts & Crafts Nights on 12/7 and 4/19, Multicultural Night on 3/22, and Celebration of Arts on 5/24. 10. The Cookshop program, sponsored by the NYC Food Bank, is implemented by the parent coordinator and a teacher. Parents and students are taught cooking as well as basic nutritional skills and supplied with food and materials to support the program. These parent workshops with meet once a month and dates will be included on the school calendar, school website and through a flyer sent home by backpack. 11. Celebrations of students are held once a month by administration in the auditorium. During the celebrations, students are honored for progress in any academic or social area decided on by classroom teachers and school staff. In addition, individual classes perform or present a piece of work that they are proud of. Parents are invited to the celebrations monthly by receiving a flyer home 2 weeks before the event. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator salary, school aides’ salaries, materials for posters, translation-interpretation per session as well as Facebook, Twitter and the school website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of parents will have had the opportunity to volunteer in classrooms and at school-wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 Sign in Sheets from school events and classroom participation as class parent. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading Recovery Grade 1 Leveled Literacy –focusing on fluency, vocabulary, oral language and comprehension ELA Reading Basics- grades 2 &3 One to one Small Group Tutoring 15:1 ratio Tutoring 15:1 ratio Tutoring 15:1 ratio During the school day During the day After School After school After school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom 10% of 1 st grade Bottom 20% of grade Level 1s Level 2s Level 2s Mathematics All students Level 2s Science Level 2 in ELA Social Studies Level 2 in ELA At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Students having coping and bullying issues. ELA Enrichment Grades 3-5 ELA Enrichment ELLs- Grades 1 &2 RTI activities embedded in curriculum ( math games. Grades K-5 Math Enrichment Grades 3-5 Science Enrichment- 4 th grade ELLs RTIactivities embedded in curriculum. Counseling Small group During the day Tutoring 15:1 ratio After school Tutoring 15:1 ratio After school Small group During the day Small group and one to one During school 2018-19 CEP 51 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 49 Students 16 Shelter 31 Doubled up 2 Other Temporary Living 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Continuing in the 2018-2019 school year we will reach out to the shelters and connect with each of the students caseworkers to gain a better understanding of the students and their families needs. In addition, we will be reaching out to the families by conducting a workshop/presentation at both the shelter and the school to inform the parents/guardians of the services that the STH program can assist with. We will be doing classroom observations to assess the needs of the child in their academic setting. We will also offer counseling to support students with their social and emotional needs in both an individual and group setting by an STH Social Worker. In addition, we will provide families with community resources such as, medical, food and housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 53  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. High-quality and ongoing professional development, aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards, is utilized to support our teaching staff. The Professional Development Team (Teachers, Assistant Principals and Principal) is a vertical as well as a horizontal structure that meets once a month to define the school-wide shared beliefs of structure in place for teacher support, instructional practices and goals for student achievement. We also have professional book club in place for teachers and paraprofessionals to support their pedagogy. The Inquiry Teams are facilitated by lead teachers to analyze student work samples to plan and refine instruction that engages all students in challenging academic tasks. The lead teachers meet with perspective grades to deepen the process and production of the instructional goals and strategic decisions made throughout the school to support rigorous curriculum for engagement of all learners.  P.S.16 participates in the teacher preparation programs through The College of Staten Island and Touro. Administrators and cooperating teachers work closely with the teaching supervisors and the student teachers to ensure that the student teachers are well prepared to become qualified teachers.  Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. At the present time we have four teachers that are participating in the mentoring program.  P.S. 16 teachers have opportunities to select and attend differentiated professional development sessions on Mondays from 2:45-4:00.  Teachers at P.S. 16 also participate in professional development opportunities through work with the Learning Partners Program, National Training Network, Living Literacy, and Algebra For All. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 55  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our Professional Development goals and decisions are directly aligned with the goals for our students and teachers for greatest impact on learning. A collaborative Professional Development team devised a plan to support staff in their continued learning. Our school utilizes surveys to promote reflective practices, self-actualizing, and encouraging teacher leadership. As a school we differentiate the professional development to meet the needs and interests of the various adult learners. The PD goals came as a result of input from teacher feedback and surveys from this school year. 1. Online PD Self Directed: Teq Online will be utilized as an online professional development opportunity for teachers and Para professionals. Some will be assigned according to need in addition to opportunity for self-driven needs. 2. Teacher/Paraprofessional Directed: Create leaders to develop, implement and assess professional development according to the variety of surveys afforded to the staff. Share best practices in teaching pedagogy based on interest and/or need. These planned sessions are designed by the teacher leader and administration 3. Book Study: Teachers and/or Paraprofessionals will participate in differentiated book studies that will deepen the knowledge of fostering discussion among students across all content areas. Books to be determined. 4. Daytime Inquiry Team Work: Student work samples analyzed to make strategic instructional decisions. 5. Outside Professional Development Workshops : Teachers and Paraprofessionals participate in a variety of workshops offered by the District/, Central or other sources with the anticipation that they will be the “all knowing other” to turn-key relevant information. Each PD session is followed up with a Debrief with the Administrative Team. After completing the workshop(s), teacher led sessions are presented to colleagues based on grade/school-wide goals. In particular, there is a Lead ENL teacher team working in a LPP Triad to support and strengthen school-wide work around second language acquisition. Math Teacher Team members will work with a NTN consultant, as well as Philip Ponterio, NYCDOE Math Instructional Lead, to support school-wide work around the learning progressions and deconstructing the standards in order to identify learning intentions and support students along the continuum to achieve higher levels of success. 6.. Instructional Rounds: Teachers inter-visit their colleagues’ classrooms during instructional practice, taking low inference notes, followed by a debrief in order to deepen their knowledge of effective practice around the Danielson Framework and school-wide goals. Teachers share their own reflections and support each other with next steps in order to increase student achievement. 7. The school will also participate in an LPP Triad focusing on second language acquisition, specifically focusing on Listening and Speaking Standards. The work of the LPP team will serve as model for the rest of the school learning community. Classroom Lab site will be developed for teachers to visit. Benchmark data will be collected to determine instructional steps and areas of focus. Specific protocols and teacher focus groups will provide strategic planning models to increase success around teaching and learning implications. 8. Content Teachers will be working on PBL (Project Based Learning) to implement a hands on approach to learning content through using real world scenarios, challenges, and problems so they can gain useful knowledge and skills. Teachers will include complex questions or problems to develop and enhance student learning by encouraging critical thinking, problem solving, teamwork and self management. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We have a kindergarten orientation in May for new incoming students and parents. During this time members of our administration, teachers and parent coordinator present our school vision, mission, academic programs and many of our extracurricular programs. Parents have the opportunity to visit classrooms and meet teachers. Children enrolled in our Pre-K program are provided opportunity to visit the cafeteria, Kindergarten classrooms and Library to learn more about their upcoming academic experiences. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 57  The administration and teachers have formed a MOSL Team that selects assessments for evaluative purposes for our school’s teaching staff. Additionally, they meet monthly to reflect on the assessments we are using and to make any changes or adjustments to them. The school has a Professional Development Team comprised of teachers, paraprofessionals and administration. They decide on the professional development plan for the school for the current year. As a school we differentiate the professional development to meet the needs of the various adult learners interests and needs. Example: online PD self-directed, teacher/ paraprofessional directed and book study 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 457,497.00 99,885.00 16,974.00 0 2,985,034.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c , 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 58  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 59  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The John J. Driscoll School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The John J. Driscoll School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 60  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 61  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The John J. Driscoll School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 62  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 63  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 64  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 65  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 66 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Instruction will be in English and native language of Spanish will be supported by the bilingually certified teachers. Bilingual Our Title III after school program provides direct instruction which supplements the mandated ESL instructional time students are receiving during the regular school day as per CR part 154. This program is offered to select students, in grades one through five, with a focus on improving Literacy and Math skills for English Language Learners. All instruction for all programs will be in English in order to support greater achievement across all areas of language proficiency. Results on the 2017-2018 state ELA and Math tests indicate that a majority ( 62%) of ELL students in grades 3 through 5 scored a level one in ELA and 64% students scored a one on the Math. Therefore this school year, we are expanding our programs to serve not only grades 3 through 5 but also grades 2 through 3 to ensure that they receive supplement instruction to assist in increasing English proficiency and strengthen literacy and math skills.Our first program will serve 72 students at the Transitioning/Expanding Level in grades two, three, four and five. The subgroup that we will be targeting will be the ELL's in the four to six years. They are invited to participate in enrichment program in ELA and Math on Wednesdays and Thursdays from January to March from 2:45p.m. to 4:15 p.m. The program will provide up to 23 sessions of enrichment for 1.5 hrs each session. The teachers will use the Common Core aligned program, Reading and Math Triumph Learning. The title NY Coach Supporting the standards, Target Reading Comprehension and Target Foundational Mathematics program will be used to support differentiated needs of the students. Three licensed ESL teachers ( one per grade) will be conducting the instruction. The focus of this instruction will be to assist students in developing deeper levels of comprehension and strengthening of reading and math skills. There will be groups formed to specifically identify and monitor the development comprehension skills through strategic writing practices. Through strategic intervention, student comprehension of text and ability to write based on text will improve. Through Close Reading and interactive writing opportunities, students will develop greater independence and higher levels of comprehension. ELL students from the Dual Language classes will be part of the students invited to this program. These will be English instruction only. All communication with families will be provided in home language as needed. Instruction will be in English and native language of Spanish will be supported by the bilingually certified teachers. The second group of students we are targeting are (40) 2nd and 3rd grade students. The subgroup we will be targeting will be the newcomers. These students were selected based on their Fountas and Pinnell levels. Most of them were levels E to I, which translate to end kindergarten to mid first grade levels. These students will be receiving instruction in basic reading. The focus of the instruction will be to develop understanding of letter/sound combinations to identify unknown words leading to an improvement of reading comprehension. The focus on comprehension will strongly include on oral language development and the transference to written skills demonstrating a depth of understanding as well. The program structure will include explicit instruction and time to practice . There will be multiple supports for access to reading through a range of different genres, and providing an environment rich in language experiences including discussion about words and their meanings 2018-19 CEP 68  Prediction Think-aloud (teacher or student) Text Structure (story, informational) Visual representation of text Summarization Questions/questioning Explicit instruction of the strategy and when/how it should be used Teacher/student modeling the strategy in action Collaboration in the use of the strategy Guided practice in the use of the strategy Independent use of the strategy Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and text (meaning and interpretation). The comprehension instruction will include five components: · · · · · Thorough analysis and exposure to effective individual comprehension strategies, including · · · · · · The program and supplemental books that will be used for Bridging the Gap are, Evan Moor's, Daily Phonics for grades 2 and 3. All instruction will be delivered in English Only, by state certified ENL teachers. There will be 2 ENL teachers, one per grade, each with 20 students in the group. The program will be held for 23 sessions at 1.5 hrs each session. This program will be on Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45p.m. to 4:15p.m. and will run from October through December. All instruction will be in English only, with communications sent home in parents home or preferred language of choice. Attendance will be taken daily and student achievement monitored through formative assessments. Instruction will be in English and native language of Spanish will be supported by the bilingually certified teachers. Also, our after school Title III program is offered to fourth grade ELLs to familiarize them with the content and format of the New York State Science assessment which they will take in the Spring. The subgroup we will be targeting will be the ELL's in the four to six years. These students (20) have been chosen to participate in this program as a result of classroom and content area teacher recommendation. This program will utilize Common-core aligned materials to support their learning. The title of the book being used is the common core aligned -Triumph Learning NYS Coach Science Grade 4 Gold Ed.The science content program will allow the students to improve on their literacy strategies and skills and the four modalities. Students will have an opportunity to work hands on with science materials and apply scientific concepts and the demonstration of scientific language while learning. The exposure to content level texts and hands-on experience will increase student comprehension. It will run from January through May meeting each Wednesday from 2:45p.m. to 4:15p.m for a total of 17 sessions. There will be one certified ENL teacher with a class of up to 15 students on Grade 4. Instruction will be in English only with all communication sent home in parents' home language or language of preference.All materials to be utilized are Common Core aligned. Materials will be purchased using the 20% allocated from Title lll. All instruction will be provided in English. A supervisor will be paid out of Title 111 funds for the Wednesday and Thursday ELA and Math programs and the science program on Wednesdays since these are the only programs running in the building. All 8 teachers are fully certified teachers. These teachers are certified ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers. Since these are all certified in ESOL and Bilingual, each of the teachers will have their own class. Thus maintaining the size of the grouping small.In order to provide better educational support to our ELL's. Student attendance and progress will be tracked weekly. Teachers will carefully decipher student needs through formative assessment strategies in order to support student needs sufficiently. The principal will maintain all records in her office in a secure file cabinet. 2018-19 CEP 69 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: With close to 25% of our student population identified as English Language Learners, school-wide pedagogical support continues to be a priority at PS16. In order to support school-wide goals our school's professional development program for Title III teachers emphasizes collaboration between the classroom teacher and ENL teacher. Providing consistency and coherence among our push-in ENL teachers and their colleagues is vital to the success of students. The collaboration allows for continuity of expectations and implementation of instruction. This is accomplished through having two common preparation periods each week. During this time, ENL teachers meet with classroom teachers in order to identify student needs to plan multiple entry points for all learners in order to maximize the teaching and learning during their work sessions. Collaboratively, the teachers will plan scaffolding of questions, tasks and visually engaging learning opportunities for ELL students.nt As part of our Title lll plan we will conduct a book study with the ENL Teachers and Dual Language teachers. The teachers will be paid from the 10% of the Professional Development monies in the Title lll budget. Our Dual Language and ENL Model Teachers, Sally Martinez and Alexandra Scribani, will facilitate the book study. We currently have 6 licensed Bilingual teachers in grades K-5. The book selection will include a focus on engaging second language learners in academic discussions. This book study will be 6 sessions, on Wednesdays in November and December for 1.5hrs. After the book study is completed, these 6 teachers will turnkey the strategies to our general education teachers during the required 80 minutes PD on two Mondays in January. Professional Development will be held on Mondays from 2:45-4:00 p.m for 27 sessions from September 2018-June 2019. The PD Calendar below includes ELA, Math, and content planning among classroom teachers and ENL teachers. The topics related below will impact instruction for Ell's tremendously as they are focused on specifically in each session. 9/17 · · · · · Prek, Rm 128 K-2, Room 3-5, Room Clusters Paraprofessionals · Prek, Rm 128 K-2, Room 3-5, Room Clusters Paraprofessionals Unit 1, Parent Sessions, Trips 2018-19 CEP 70 Prek All Teachers Paraprofessionals Parent Session ELA MOSL Scoring&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Prek K-3 &amp; 4-5 ELA Teachers 3-5 MathTeachers Paraprofessionals Part C: Professional Development · · · · Unit 1, Parent Sessions, Trips ULIT Coach Intro Session, ENL Strategies for ELA Spec Ed Referral, Tracking overview PBL: Including ENL strategies to support multiple points of entry Goal Setting & Growth Mindset 9/24 · · · Prek All Teachers Paraprofessionals · · Parent Session ELA MOSL Scoring 10/1 · · · · Prek K-3 & 4-5 ELA Teachers 3-5 MathTeachers Paraprofessionals · · · Prek - Unit 2 ELA Next Gen Lrng Stdrds Crosswalk, Advanced Literacy for ELs Supporting ELs in Spec Ed Setting 10/15 · · · PreK K-2 Teachers 3-5 MathTeachers · Clusters · Paraprofessionals · · · · sources PreK K-2 Teachers 3-5 MathTeachers Clusters Paraprofessionals Prek - Unit 2 ELA Next Gen Lrng Stdrds Crosswalk, Advanced Literacy for ELs Supporting ELs in Spec Ed Setting&nbsp; ULIT Coach Intro Session, ENL Strategies for ELA Spec Ed Referral, Tracking overview PBL: Including ENL strategies to support multiple points of entry&nbsp; Goal Setting &amp; Growth Mindset Prek - Data anaylsis K-2 Spec Ed Referral, Tracking 3-5 Math Teachers: Standards Trends, Data Dive: Subgroup analysis Smart Amp, Part 1: Reaching all students, including ELs and SWDs through multi-media 2018-19 CEP 71  PreK K-5 Teachers Clusters&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Paraprofessionals Unit 2 Math Next Gen Standards Crosswalk Smart Amp, &nbsp;Part 2&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Supporting ELs in Spec Ed Setting through out the content areas, supporting teaching Part C: Professional Development Prek - Data anaylsis K-2 Spec Ed Referral, Tracking 3-5 Math Teachers: Standards Trends, Data Dive: Subgroup analysis Smart Amp, Part 1: Reaching all students, including ELs and SWDs through multi-media sources · · · · PreK K-5 Teachers Clusters Paraprofessionals · · · · &amp;&nbsp;learning&nbsp; Unit 2 Math Next Gen Standards Crosswalk Smart Amp, Part 2 The remainder of the calendar will be uploaded, as we proceed to meet our school's professional development goals, according to an ongoing needs of our school for the remainder of the year. Our ENL team will turn key topics related to implementation and compliance of CR 154, planning and implementing instructional ESL strategies driven by goals retrieved from the NYSESLAT data and our school wide Learning Focus Area,as well as, an introduction to the use of SIOP in ENL lessons. This will support the school-wide instructional focus. The book study will focus on the incorporation of language objectives, planning around the CCLS Listening and Speaking Standards as well as high quality discussions among students while engaging in learning in the content areas. Our ENL teachers are also scheduled to attend a district workshop learning series in 6 sessions from October 2018- June of 2019. This model will be provided by the Center for Applied Linguistics. It will focus on using reflective teaching skills to examine teaching practice and learning strategies, of comprehension, vocabulary and reading. ENL certified Teacher will turn key how to use a Thinking Lens protocol to align goals, values and visions. This will impact instruction to help ELLs make connections between their background knowledge, experience and new knowledge. It will also help ELLs build on and use their knowledge of how English syntax, grammar, and vocabulary work so they can read texts effectively. In addition, teachers will attend professional development workshops offered throughout the district as well as offered from DELLSS. We will actively seek workshops which will strengthen instructional strategies and pedagogical models maximizing teaching and learning for all ELLs. We will identify various opportunities throughout the school year. The principal will maintain all records in her office in a secure file cabinet.Agendas will be made for each turn key workshop and held in a binder. Sign in sheets will be kept to track regular classroom teachers and ENL/Bilingual teachers participation and attendance. 2018-19 CEP 72  rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Our school offers many activities focused on parent engagement, specifically for parents of our second language learners in order to promote academic achievement among ELLs. P.S. 16 has a full service parent center, in which families can attend workshops and utilize our bilingual lending library. These workshops are provided in English and Spanish. Our school employs a full-time bilingual Parent coordinator, and two day a week Bilingual school social worker, Bilingual psychologist and a Bilingual Guidance Counsellor. We utilize our bilingual staff to assist teachers in making contact with parents concerning their children's academic and social and emotional progress, needs or concerns at parent / teacher conferences, IEP meetings and during any meetings the parents might have with the teachers. Parents will attend workshops during the school day that are held twice a month beginning in September and running through June. There are 20 parent sessions a year, for 1 hour each session. It addresses a variety of topics. Based on feedback from the PTA and SLT, some parent requested topics include; Welcome Back ( an informational meeting for Ell parents to learn about the curriculum, specific academic strategies and skills that will be implemented to make sure that their children will succeed as well as information concerning NYSESLAT, ELA, Math testing and modifications for ELL students, support in understanding the writing process and the progressions of reading as indicated by the standards. In addition, we will provide opportunities with methodologies to support the extension of learning at home and through local venues in our community. Parents are welcomed into the classrooms to share in their child's learning monthly. Educational Workshops on Health and Nutrition are conducted throughout the school year. These workshops include: Asthma, Flu and germ prevention, stress management and lead poisoning. As part of our Respect For All program, there are workshops on bullying and cyber- bullying. These workshops are facilitated by Rita Maniglia-Diaz, our bilingual parent coordinator and our Respect for All liaison. PTA meeting held once a month,on the third Wednesday, with alternating day/ evening times. All of these meetings are conducted in both English and Spanish. Following each day time PTA meeting there is a Family Literacy workshop provided for parents, with home language interpreters present. Homework help is available from October through May every Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in the school library, from 2:45 to 3:45.. All home/school connection information and events are provided in both English and Spanish. Flyers and school calendars are sent home with students, posted on dismissal and arrival doors, posted on the bulletin board outside the parent center, twitted and place on our school website. Our Parent Coordinator will maintain all records in a Title 3 binder with attendance, agendas and materials shared. All communication will be provided in the parents' preferred language of choice. 2018-19 CEP 73 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 16,974 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL . 2018-19 CEP 74  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name John J Driscoll Borough Staten Island School Number 16 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michele Ramos Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tara McGuigan Teacher/Subject Area Lara Scaringella/ENL Teacher/Subject Area S. Martinez/3rd Dual Related-Service Provider Stacy Teller Superintendent A. Lodico Assistant Principal Chris Allen Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. J. Colon Parent Tina Collucci (PTA) Parent Coordinator Rita Diaz- Maniglia Field Support Center Staff Member Mildred Cordova Other (Name and Title) Nilda Kraft C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] N/A Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 2 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 478 2018-19 CEP 75 Total number of ELLs 137 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.66%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A N/A N/A 2004-05 N/A 1 K 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 Lang. N/A N/A N/A Span N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 5 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NYSESLAT, New York State does not mandate that students below grade three participate in standardized testing. Instead, schools have the opportunity to choose their own assessment tool to gauge early literacy skills. In 2015, P.S 16 began using Fountas and Pinnell English and Spanish reading assessment grades K-5 to support our teachers in targeting this critical work. Fountas and Pinnell offers a number of assessments to support our teachers in this critical work. Emergent readers, in grades K-2 are assessed in Concepts of Print, Letter-Sound Identification, High-frequency sight words, writing, vocabulary, listening and recognition of sounds,word features and independent reading levels for both fiction and Non-fiction texts. For grades 3-5 students are also assessed in Fountas and Pinnell in the similar areas but, with elements expanding into assessing accuracy, reading rate, fluency, comprehension, word features and writing. This year we assessed students using the SIPPS assessment. The SIPPS assessment measures (a) the students’ use of phonics to read decodable words and (b) their knowledge of sight words. The earlier sections of the assessment cover beginning reading skills and include two components of using phonics: students’ knowledge of spelling-sound relationships and their ability to blend sounds (a 2018-19 CEP 76  critical phonological skill).Students in K-2 are tested and the goals are measured accordingly. K-2 also uses a beginning of the year(boy) , middle of the year (MOY), and end of the year assessments (EOY), or performance based tasks (MOSL) to assess progress and inform our instruction throughout the year. Dual Language teachers also assess native Spanish speaking students in K-1 using Estrelita. Estrelita assesses the phonics components using, concepts of print, letter/sound identification, sight words, reading and writing. In 2016, we began to assess Spanish speaking native speakers grades 3-5 using Paso Por Palabras . ELA and Math Core Collaborative Team members have generated teacher created assessments, exemplars, pre and post exams, given at the beginning and end of each unit to track student strengths and weaknesses in each core standard area. There is also an in- depth, school and district-wide collaboration to improve the speaking and listening and writing achievement of our ENL students using text based discussion structures embedded into our literacy block. Dual language and ENL teachers also assess students on academic language used during these text- based student discussions.Students are assessed regularly grades K-5 using formative checklists aligned to the Targets of Measurement (TOMS) . The focus on improvement in the areas of listening and speaking has bridged us to use speaking as a design for students to transfer their responses into written form for 2017/18 school years. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? After analyzing the data from the Fountas and Pinnell used 2015/16, we realize that students identified as being most ENLs in the lower grades are performing lower than their native English counterparts in reading and writing. As reading requirements become more demanding in the upper grades, the disparity between students identified as ENLs and their monolingual peers begin to widen. Inquiry work has shown that our ENL's struggle with vocabulary as well as with using meaning and proper syntax when decoding. Poor vocabulary makes it difficult to infer from context clues when decoding for meaning. Also inquiry teams have found that a large portion of our ELLs drop end-word morphological affixes,as well as not using prefixes and suffixes. Again, proving the use of proper syntax to be paramount in understanding. This work will continue to be a focus and will deepen into the 2017-2018 school year. At P.S. 16 we have been focusing closely on our proficiency data from the NYS ELA exam; 17% (2015-2016) and 11% the year prior. When we set out on our work with Paul Bloomberg and the Core Collaborative team, we determined that our priority standards would be standards 4 and 5 in grades 3-5. We chose these standards because they were among the lowest when we looked at the item skills analysis. However after discussing our vision with our ELA core team along with the guidance of Paul Bloomberg, we discovered that while it is of the utmost important to have priority standards in the upper grades around the state test data, we realized that our most important work needs to be in our primary grades. Our thinking shifted quickly as we looked closely at our Fountas and Pinnell running record data. Inquiry teams uncovered data through Informal assessments also seem to indicate that our ENLs struggle with learning new vocabulary-often altering their comprehension of longer fiction texts, as well as, understanding content in non fiction text. Inquiry has shown that our ENL students attend to visual cues in pictures but not so much in the text print. Our ENL students struggle with utilizing and understanding academic vocabulary during reading and writing in the content areas. Our Ells also struggle with visual cues and proper syntax when decoding. Also teams have found that a large portion of our ENLs drop end-word morphological affixes, and struggle to distinguish between short and long vowel medial sounds. In February, more than 85% of our K and 1 students were reading significantly below grade level . Because of this, we have placed a new focus on "accuracy" in our literacy instruction, and more attention to semantic structuring of both fiction and non-fiction texts is needed..Through the guidance of Paul Bloomberg, we administered the SIPPS assessment. The SIPPS assessment measures (a) students’ use of phonics to read decodable words and (b) their knowledge of sight words. The earlier sections of the assessment cover beginning reading skills and include two components of using phonics: students’ knowledge of spelling-sound relationships and their ability to blend sounds (a critical phonological skill). We made the decision to test students from grades K, 1 and 2. It was at that time that we made the decision to shift our thinking from priority standards 4 and 5 to focusing on the early, reading foundational standards in order to build a solid platform from which to grow our readers. This evidence has led to a new instructional initiative in K-1, which uses Orton Gillingham as a mandated part of the literacy block. K-1 classes will implement a non-negotiable The plan is as follows: 2018-19 CEP 77  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The NYSESLAT is administered once a year each spring to determine continuation of service eligibility, as well as, scheduling and individual student performance in each modality. In order to provide our English Language Learners with a standards-based, quality education, the P.S. 16 community will align all programs with the Common Core Learning Standards in all content areas, implement effective monitoring and assessment for both programs (Dual, ESL), provide professional development opportunities for all our teachers in effective practices that meet the needs of our students who are at various proficiencies in English language learning. This year we have also used NYC Performance Tasks to track ELL academic progress for grades K-5, in both, ELA and Math. These assessments are given 3 times per year, beginning, middle,and end. Three target standards were chosen for each content area, as they were tracked for data trends and instructional implications. Teachers in grades K-5 assess students twice a year using the MOSL in ELA and Math. These assessments also help to identify the student baseline measurement as teachers use the data to strive for progress targeted to deficient areas. In addition, Dual language and ENL teachers assess students on academic language used during text- based student discussion. We have developed a standards based, discussion baseline assessment, which is used 3 times per year, at the beginning, middle and end. These assessments capture student growth and progress in using academic language during text-based student discussion targeted within the literacy block. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At PS 16, the successes of programs for ELLs are measured using a combination of formative and summative data. Our Summative data collected from state-wide content-area examinations are sorted and disaggregated, then measured against results from previous years, those of our English Proficient population and subgroups, and further measured against those of ELL populations in schools whose demographics resemble our own. NYSESLAT test results, provide some measure of comparison of success between program models in assessing programs’ facilitation of English language acquisition. This hard data is conjoined with faculty anecdotal evidence, running records for literacy, and informal assessments of student work and development to create a broad representation of program and individual student success. Core Collaborative ELA and Math teams meet regularly to vertically align instructional shifts across all ELA and Math with CCLS standards. Core Collaborative teams design and modify curriculum maps and implement core curriculum depending on trends revealed through data collection in performance tasks and end of unit pre and post assessments. ELA and Math Core Collaborative Team members have generated teacher created assessments, exemplars, pre and post exams, given at the beginning and end of each unit to track student strengths and weaknesses in each core standard area.Three target standards were chosen for each content area, as they were tracked for data trends and instructional implications. Data analysis revealed a decrease in the listening, speaking, and writing skills of our English Language Learners on the NYSESLAT, therefore we are fostering building Academic vocabulary as another prominent focus. We are developing student use of academic vocabulary through student led, peer to-peer discussions in small groups school wide. Since 2015, our partnership as a Learning Partners’ School has our work and collaboration has led to building capacity for in-depth school-wide collaboration and improves the achievement of our ENL students; while using text based discussion structures, embedded into our literacy block. Teacher teams have worked to monitor and align instructional focuses for our ENL students, using the data contrived from checklists that use the targets of measurement (TOMS). Students listening, speaking, and writing are monitored regularly and progressing throughout the process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, we determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: • Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program • English and home language literacy • Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs • Results on 2018-19 CEP 78  the annual English language proficiency assessment exam • Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation • Content area teacher recommendation • Parent or guardian request • Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language • Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability. Students in K-2, who score below grade level on benchmark assessments for ELA through Fountas and Pinnell are provided with Academic Intervention Services (AIS). The program uses Students will receive a pre test and then the student will be given six weeks of small group intervention. After the six weeks a post test will be given to evaluate progress and the student’s independent reading level will be re-evaluated. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We examine the data patterns across proficiency levels (as per NYSITEL and NYSESLAT) indicate closely to see if progress was made in overall proficiency, or in one or more of each of the modalities. We find this information by looking at each child's testing history on ATS, to see the individual breakdown of their score, in each of the four different modalities. We cross reference their performance with the NYSESLAT cut scores to determine proficiency in each modality. This allows us to see what areas each child needs to work on individually. The EDAT is used to target individual student performance in all four modalities, as well as, long- term ENLs, students at risk, and SIFE students. The ENL teachers look at the overall general performance and data trends on the NYSESLAT to reflect upon the current structure of the program. This data is reviewed and suggestions are made for changes in scheduling, grouping, instruction and materials used to continue to foster progress at a greater rate behind their listening and speaking counterparts. In closing the achievement gap, ENL students made good progress on the ELA and math compared to other students who scored at the same level the year before. The majority of our students enter our school entering/emerging level and progress toward transitioning and expanding levels, as they progress through to grades 3-5. When looking at NYSESLAT data, it is revealed that there is a close correlation between the number of years of service and increased ENL proficiency in each of the four modalities. The data has shown that students in all grades perform the greatest in the speaking and listening components of the NYSESLAT. Students enter grade level with stronger listening and speaking skills, as well as, fluent basic interpersonal language used for communication. Conversely, the data reveals that our students are obtaining lower scores on the reading and writing modalities. Most of the Beginner students are in Kindergarten. The majority of Intermediate level students are in Second and Fourth Grade. The majority of Advanced students are in the upper grades. Student's reading and writing proficiency levels tend to lag when academic language is being assessed PS 16 evaluates the success of our program for our ELL students by analyzing the breakdown of our students' scores on the different modalities of the NYSESLAT. In addition ongoing efforts to sustain and increase communication with all our families and inform them of the school’s expectations and instructional practices. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The EDAT is run annually and used to target individual student performance in all four modalities, as well as, long- term Ells, students At Risk, and SIFE students. The ENL teachers look at the overall general performance and data trends on the NYSESLAT, as well as, NYS ELA and Math Exam, and informal assessments to reflect upon the current structure of the program. Data trends that are identified are shared with classroom teachers during collaborative and instructional planning times. When reviewed by the teams, the ENL teachers make suggestions for changes in scheduling, grouping, instruction and materials that are used to continue to foster progress in needed areas. Data trends are also shared with the LPP team ( ENL teachers and Dual Language Teachers), who utilize the data to also plan for future cycles of learning and target instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 79  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL:• Stand-alone ENL service is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction.The second type of ENL instruction is the integrated ENL minutes delivered by a dually licensed ENL and content area specialist. Integrated instruction is delivered in an CCT model. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of standalone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL a week. In contrast, Transitioning students receive only 90 minutes of integrated (ELA) and 90 minutes standalone minutes of instruction. Advanced placed students receive 180 integrated minutes within ELA or any content area. Finally commanding students receive 90 minutes integrated instruction weekly for up to 2 years after testing out.. • ENL students are grouped heterogeneously with mixed levels of English proficiency in general education and special education classes. Integrated ENL instruction is provided according to the English Language Learners mandated amount of weekly minutes, by an ENL push-in and the classroom teacher in an ICT team teaching model. The integration builds English language skills through content area instruction. It is either delivered by a dually certified teacher ENL and content area licensed teacher or co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). At P.S 16 we have two ENL push ins. One teacher is certified in TESOL and the other is certified for both TESOL and common branches. We also have 2 self contained ENL teachers who provide instruction for both content and ENL for ELL students in their classroom.Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. Within the heterogeneous classroom students are grouped homogeneously within small groups by proficiency level and receive the mandated amount of minutes depending on their level of proficiency ENL Push-In Services are provided by an ENL certified teacher. Instruction is provided in English using ENL methodologies and scaffolding techniques. We currently do not have the mandated number of options to open a transitional bilingual program at P.S 16. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently do not have a transitional bilingual program at P.S 16. c. DL program. If applicable. ENL services in a dual language classroom are implemented by a fully licensed bilingual classroom teacher in dual language. Instruction is delivered in a 50/50 model; with half being in English and the Students in these classes are mixed and placed heterogeneously in the classroom. During small group instruction students are then grouped homogeneously according to their English Proficiency levels and areas of academic need. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The following is a comprehensive breakdown of our instructional models along with explanation as to how they ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes (as per CR Part 154).Freestanding ENL- PS 16 employs a faculty of 4 teachers currently working under their TESOL license. We will have two self-contained ENL classrooms (1st grade, 3rd grade). In grades K-1 and 4-5 we have push-in/pull-out model of ENL instruction. When necessary students who are unable to be placed in ENL designated classes on the grade level such as self contained special education and ICT students, receive ENL services as per their IEP via small group “pull out”. Students are grouped homogeneously into designated ENL classes on each grade where ENL service providers work collaboratively with classroom teachers to meet the needs of these ELLs. Grouping the students homogeneously allows for the most effective scheduling for the ENL push in personnel. Instructional practice: ENL teachers use a “push-in, pull-out” model to meet the required time allotment for English Language Learners. Students whose English proficiency levels are Entering an Emerging receive 360 minutes per week of English as a New Language. 1 unit of study is 180 minutes. Entering students receive 1 unit of study in ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA, and 1 unit of study can be stand alone 2018-19 CEP 80  ENL instruction or integrated ENL in a Content Area. Emerging students receive .5 unit of study in ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA, and .5 unit of study can be stand alone ENL or integrated ENL in the content area. Students whose English proficiency level is Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes per week of English as a New Language. Transitioning students receive .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA and .5 unit of study in either stand alone ENL or integrated ENL/content area. Expanding students receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other content area. Students who are commanding receive 90 minutes pers week of English as a New Language. Commanding students receive 5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA/Content Area or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years. Teachers use the workshop model, small group instruction, guided reading, and the collaborative team teaching model, with ENL methodologies to instruct students. For the 2017-18 school year, classrooms will be set up so that ENL teachers will be able to primarily use the integration model, and the stand alone model when necessary to instruct ELL students. During these integration periods, providers will implement methodologies proven to be especially effective when educating English Language Learners, such as scaffolding, picture supports, etc. By integrating, providers and classroom teachers are able to collaboratively give students content area and language based instruction, thus further developing academic language acquisition. ENL teachers spend about half of the time integrating during ELA instruction and the other half in math or content areas. This provides support in all disciplines. On occasion, we are not always able to place students in the ENL designated class. This can be due to class size regulations and other programming needs (i.e. ICT, self-contained special education). Therefore, students may be serviced through a pull-out model of instruction. In this event students are pulled-out in groups based upon their grade level, language proficiency, and IEP mandates. This small group instruction ensures that the teachers are able to hone in on each student’s individual strengths and needs. In both models of instruction, teachers present the same task using multiple entry points to scaffold their progress allowing all students to approach it in their own way. In addition, support materials that correspond to the classroom curriculum are utilized. This may include graphic organizers, educational websites, books and realia gathered by the teachers. ENL methodologies such as Whole Language, Cooperative Learning, and Total Physical Response are employed throughout the program. Scaffolding techniques are used when learning core-curriculum material. ESL services will be available from kindergarten through fifth grade. A schedule is created by the ENL teachers to provide 360 minutes of ENL instruction to Entering and Emerging level students,180 minutes to the Transition and Commanding level, and 90 minutes to the commanding students in all grades. All teachers will focus their instruction based on the Common Core State Standards. Professional development is received by all classroom and out of classroom personnel to help push the children towards college and career readiness. Students who reach commanding as measured by the NYSESLAT will continue to receive 90 minutes of ENL services a week for two years.Dual Language Program- The dual language program is available for students from kindergarten through fifth grade. The Dual Language Program at Public School 16 consists of 50% of English Proficient students and 50% Spanish Proficient. There is instructional equity in both languages throughout all areas of the curriculum. Bilingual Certified teachers ensure all Limited English Proficient receive their mandated instruction in English through support and utilization of ESL strategies and techniques to meet their language needs. All Dual Language classes use a self-contained 50:50 weekly model in which they alternate literacy and content in both languages. Students who reach proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT will continue to receive ENL services within their dual language setting for two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Actively engaging all students in differentiated tasks as well as fostering the depth of discussions to increase independence across all content areas is the focus of our work with ENL students this year. ENL instruction is delivered for 360 minutes a week in 180 minute integrated model and a 180 minute stand alone. Next year we are moving the transfer of spoken language to written language using all content areas, and while engaging students in technology to assist them in the process. Teachers use the workshop model and small group differentiation to deliver instruction in all content areas. This encompasses the mini lesson, student to student discussion, independent/ small group instruction, writing and the share out. Language objectives are embedded into the content of each lesson. Small group instruction breaks out after the mini- lesson. Our small group instruction is monitored by formative assessments and checklists which utilizes data to monitor student progress and drive instructional goals for the students. We created checklists for writing and speaking using the targets of measurement (TOMS) in order to monitor growth in each dimension. Small group instruction then focuses on the individual needs of the students, who share similar needs and are grouped homogeneously. The students are exposed to English as a new language through a focus on language instruction,language 2018-19 CEP 81  objectives built into the content objectives. ENLs absorb and utilize new vocabulary by using the shades of meaning (and other methodologies supported by Maryann Cucchiara) that build background knowledge and new vocabulary through interactive discussions and frontloading. Vocabulary is also synthesized using strategies like realia, and synthesizing sensational words and sentences. Using technology programs like ,My On and Time for Kids (TFK), help boost language and vocabulary in all content areas. Using technology helps motivates students and makes content comprehensible to all. Oral language is developed further through interactive discussions and language framing supports which work cohesively with the pacing of our curriculum maps. This focus is expanded through small group instruction where students use technology to interact with sites that foster the depth of understanding and enrich content.To ensure that the two languages are covered equally, during Dual Language instruction, an alternating week 50:50 model is being implemented. The students will receive explicit ENL & SSL instruction on a daily basis guided by a curriculum map. Native language arts and English language instruction will be integrated into the content areas through the use of visuals and technology. Both Dual Language and ENL programs are accomplished by using appropriate text selections, picture, videos, SMART Boards, listening centers, cameras, IPads, computers and manipulatives, to foster ESL growth and progress. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The students who are eligible for ENL services and whose native language is Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB-R upon registration. In the Dual Language program teachers administer formal and informal assessments in Spanish. Throughout the year students take several NYS assessments in Spanish such as the ELE, as well as a variety of content area tests in Spanish. Students are entitled to a version of NYS assessments in their home language when applicable. If no version exists in the student's’ home language we have access to interpreters through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status PS 16 differentiates instruction for a variety of ELL subgroups:Both Newcomers ELLs have been enrolled into English as a new Language program for a total of 0-3 continuously enrolled school years. SIFE (students with Interrupted Formal Education) have been enrolled into NYC city schools less than twelve months and who upon enrollment are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and two or more grade levels below in mathematics. Long Term ELLs are students enrolled 7 or more years of services in the United States. These students will be considered within their subgroups until they are performing at or above the transitioning and intermediate levels on the NYSESLAT. Newcomers and SIFE students SIFE student eligibility is determined if a student is identified as missing some formal education and are three or more grade levels below their counterparts when in grades 3-5. SIFE eligibility is tested using the MLS tool. The Multi -Lingual Literacy screener is a statewide diagnostic tool used to determine SIFE Literacy Levels in their home language in order to provide or design appropriate instruction for these students. Screener will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. This model is divided into 180 minutes which are delivered in a stand alone model and 180 minutes which are delivered through integrated content instruction in collaboration with the classroom teacher. During stand alone, ENL instruction is targeted through guided reading, small group skill, strategy lessons, and one on one conferencing with the classroom teacher. These teaching methods allow teachers to meet children at their level of proficiency and guide and coach them to greater levels of proficiency. Teachers will use Fountas and Pinnell as a diagnostic tool to track progress in reading and to match readers with “just right” books (books they can read and want to read). Leveled books in fiction and non-fiction will be used in all grades. Fountas and Pinnell tracks a student's reading process. It measures their accuracy, reading rate, fluency, and comprehension. Strategic math groups help target instruction for these students in Long term ENL students receiving 7 or more years of ENL services will be closely monitored by the classroom and ENL teacher. These pedagogues will track and monitor these students’ progress through formative assessments and make educational recommendations for them as needed. Besides the regular small group modifications, Academic Intervention Services may be provided to these students in ENL students in small classes to boost students’ academic performance and language development. There are currently no longterm Ells at P.S16. 2018-19 CEP 82  Developing ELLs between 4 and 6 years of continuously enrolled school years in the United States. In order to ensure that these students do not become long term ENLs, instruction is differentiated according to the language needs. Students slipping into the longterm ranges are given RTI . The title III program is especially geared towards these students. Due to NCLB’s requirement that ELLs in grades three through five must take the ELA after one year and are never exempt from taking the state math and science exam. Also all ELLs grades K-5 are required to take the NYSESLAT each spring. Title III programs help acclimate them to the format of the exam and its content. Whenever possible Newcomers and SIFE may be assigned “buddies” who speak their native language in order to help them navigate the school building, to help become accustomed to school rules, and also to aid in communication with teachers and other students. All students are working towards college and career readiness via academic tasks based upon Common Core State Standards. Former ELLs - For at least 2 years after exiting ELL status is achieved, former ELLs are still instructed commanding students who receive 90 minutes a week of instructional ENL support from a certified ENL teacher. Former Ells are also provided academic Intervention Services (AIS) as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All lesson content taught in grades K-5 are differentiated to meet the needs of all students. Some instructional strategies found to be most effective when educating ENL students with disabilities include but are not limited to activating background knowledge (front loading),using graphic organizers, visual-video representations, explicit modeling, role-playing, total physical response activities, think-pair share, see-think-wonder,flexible grouping, and technology programs to enrich curriculum. Multiple entry points are provided to provide opportunities to make the content accessible. Materials used with these strategies are grade and English proficiency level appropriate. They include, independent leveled readers, personal word walls, student used checklists, highlighters and post-its, dry erase boards, visual vocabulary and shades of meaning. These instructional strategies and grade-level materials provide access to academic content areas and aid in accelerating English language development. Academic language is fostered through text based and student led discussions, where students are heterogeneously grouped to maximize language potential. Kindergarten -Grade 2 In Kindergarten through Grade 2 -Orton Gillinham is used as a phonics and reading curriculum support. -Literacy Footprint is used in grades K-2 as guided reading materials and Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI)is also used as a guided reading support for struggling readers. Mondo is also used for oral language support within the literacy block. Student discussion is supported through student roles and prompting cards for discussions. Technology programs used to support leveled literacy K-2 curriculum with Raz Kids and MY ON a leveled literacy reading program online. Brain pop is also used to Curriculum and support materials are similar in grades 3,4,and 5. - Grade 3- ELA teachers in grade 3 utilize a standards based curriculum map to follow a progression of reading and writing standards. Ready Gen curriculum and authentic reading materials are melded into the reading map to utilize as a modeled instruction for touchstone texts and small group work. Books from the Ready Gen program use 50% fiction and 50% non- fiction and they are authentic texts to celebrate and support cultural and academic differences within the student reading materials for each lesson. Teaching points are also differentiated and supplemented with article support from Engage NY, and Leveled articles from Read Works.org, and NEWS ELA. All struggling students, ELL's and SWD's in grades 3-5 also use Orton Gillinham to build upon and refresh fundamental phonics skills. Leveled literacy intervention (LLI) is used for guided reading in all Special ED and ELL classrooms 3-5. 'All struggling Ells 3-5 receive 6 weeks of AIS service as well. Grade 4- ELA teachers in grade 4 utilize a standards based curriculum map to follow a progression in reading and writing. Ready Gen curriculum and authentic reading materials are melded into the reading map to utilize as a modeled instruction for touchstone 2018-19 CEP 83  text. Books from the Ready Gen program use 50% fiction and 50% non- fiction authentic texts to support as student reading materials for each lesson. Teaching points are also differentiated and supplemented with article support from Engage NY, and Leveled articles from Read Works.org, and NEWS ELA All small groups of struggling students, ELL's and SWD's in grades 3-5 also use Orton Gillinham to build upon and refresh fundamental phonics skills, as well as Fundations. Leveled literacy intervention (LLI) is used for guided reading in all Special ED and ELL classrooms 3-5. ' Grade uses Fundations to support basic foundational skills in grade 4 and supplement struggling Ell's and SWD's with Fundations. Grade 5-ELA teachers in grade 5 also utilize a standards based curriculum map to foloow a progression of reading and writing. Ready Gen curriculum are authentic reading materials melded into the reading map to utilize as a modeled instruction for touchstone text. Books from the Ready Gen program uses 50%fiction and 50% non ficiton. authentic text to support as student reading materials for each lesson. Teaching pointa are differentiated and supplemented with articles from Engage NY, leveled articles from Read Works.org. News ELA, and Smart Our school ensures ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs because the classroom teacher holds a hard copy of the IEP and can also look online on SESIS. The classroom teacher must ensure that their student receives all services mandated 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the needs of our ELLs identified as having having disabilities, our staff is comprised of a variety of support specialists. This includes a bilingual psychologist, a bilingual physical therapist, a bilingual social worker,as well as hearing, occupational, bilingual and monolingual speech therapists. In addition, monolingual and bilingual paraprofessionals are assigned to our ELLs when appropriate. ELLs that are identified as SWD have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) that outlines expected educational outcomes for each student and recommends specific interventions. Besides the mandated portion of ESL service, other such services may include, but are not limited to SETTS, speech, OT, PT, and guidance counseling. These services are monitored by the Department of Education on SESIS and the Administrators of Special Education to ensure, that special education ELL students are placed in the legally-mandated and least restrictive environment. The criteria used to place ELL-SWDs in ICT classes is a decision based upon testing done by the school psychologist and social worker. The LPT teams is comprised of a school administrator, a certified ESL teacher, the IEP teacher, the student’s parent or guardian and qualified interpreter. Members of the LPT and PPT team meet monthly to review and ensure proper allocations of provided services and use of instructional strategies. They ensure that instructional programs are within the limits of the student’s IEP and maximize potential for further growth and development. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The Pupil Personnel Team, a certified ENL teacher and the Academic Intervention Team will review the effectiveness of the academic supports provided for SIFE, Newcomers, and ELLs receiving 4-6 years of mandated services, on a weekly basis. They will offer support to the teachers and make recommendations based on student needs. All ELLs Entering through Expanding level, receive reading supports through our Leveled Literacy Intervention Program (LLI), which is used by both AIS and ENL teachers. This leveled reading program provides appropriate, research based supports for each level of instruction and aids in scaffolding them to the next level.ESL students will furthermore be the subject of deep inquiry and collaborative assessment by all related service providers and discussed monthly at specified Inquiry Team meetings. The academic intervention teachers provide small group instruction in ELA based on data from formal and informal assessments. Instruction is delivered in English. All teachers are aware of the stages of second language acquisition and utilize ENL methodologies during content area instruction. They employ strategies learned during extensive professional development, in order to make content accessible to all students. Teachers use the workshop model and small group instruction to support CCLS,literacy strategies, applying skills to real text, responding to focused writing tasks and responding to literature for specific skills development. 2018-19 CEP 84  For mathematics, teachers use the interactive learning model in a small group setting to support the understanding and application of skills. The newest instructional intervention added to design is a focus on understanding content in a small group dynamic,given by the classroom teacher is Strategic Math and beginning next year (2017/18),Strategic Reading groups. These groups are planned daily by the classroom teacher, who analyzes formative data regularly ( quizzes, +checklists, and baseline assessments) to inform them about the flexible focus on different aspects of mathematical reasoning. The group dynamic includes flexibly based student groups rotating from a fundamentals group, focusing on basic computation in all operations, a fluency group which practices word fluency (word problems), and a feedback group who focuses on struggling students who need more strategically planned interventions. Both ELA and Math curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Standards and enriched through materials from EngageNY. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Currently we have the NYS ELA and Math Test Prep programs grades 3-5 in place for ENL students. There is also a science ENL test Prep in grade 4, addressing the content needs in science. In grades 2-3 we have a phonics afterschool program called Bridge the Gap. The Read program in grades 1-2 provides reading assistance and enrichment for those ENL students. In grades K-5 we offer an afterschool homework help program and invite parental collaboration. We have added ENL enrichment programs for science, literacy,and technology. The Lego robotics program supports all content taught in STEAM.In The MakerSpace program uses technology to help students create 3D images to support other science and content taught in the STEAM program.Parents are invited to engage and collaborate with students. In 2016/17 we began the sundog afterschool program, Hip-Hop, and Hip-Hop storytelling, and drums were also added. These arts related beautification programs support content and enrich our Ells. Next year, we will add a supplemental ENL enrichment and homework help program for grades 2-3. This afterschool program helps ESL students work in homogeneous groups according to their reading level,to build reading writing and language skills in English. Students will use fluency,academic vocabulary, and the application of language to perform the books read throughout the program. PS 16 encourages ELL attendance and participation in after school enrichment programs in the following subject areas: ELA, math, and science, technology and arts. All the aforementioned programs will be staffed by certified ENL providers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No ELL support services will be discontinued. We currently do not have students whose parents chose an option for TBE. So we did not open a TBE class 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are afforded equal access to school programs regardless of ELL status. Students participate in a variety of programs The cross content curriculum ELL programs that are offered in PS 16, aide in the development of each students reading, writing, listening, and speaking abilities by enhancing background knowledge and including various hands-on activities. TESOL certified teachers have ongoing articulation with the classroom teachers in order to meet or exceed CCSS for all ELL students.Supplementary after school programs will be continued this school year for ELL students. The programs include a New York State ELA and Math Test preparation Program, beginning in January and an ENL after-school science program. The objectives of the test preparation programs are for the ELL students to gain test taking skills, building stamina as well as an understanding of the format of the tests. We will have approximately 15 students in each group and they will be grouped according to grade level. According to Robb and Ercanbrack, proficiency of language learners cannot be judged by one test if the students are not properly prepared. Being familiar with a test format and the expected outcomes can extensively alter the test results. Test preparation increases the success rate since it is confirming the importance of the exam. Invitations and parent information regarding programs will be sent home in the child's home language unless the parent/guardian indicates otherwise in order to afford equal access to all ELLs. We also offer an after school Homework Help program where all students including ENL and their parents can sit together with a teacher to learn strategies and build bridges for the home-school connection. The design of all programs will include a highly qualified, certified ENL teacher using specific techniques to increase the comprehension and language arts skills of the ELL students. The materials used for this program will include various test preparation guides, sample test materials, standards-based skills and strategies materials, and school-wide technological resources. The ELL Science Program, ENL Programs and the Test Program will last 6 weeks. The ELA/Math State ELL Test Prep for ELLs will last from January until April. An administrator will oversee the after-school programs, coordinate 2018-19 CEP 85  teacher schedules, supervise students and classroom activity. These programs are subject to funding. including- ELA, Math, science,band, chorus, art, photography, physical education, drama, robotics and technology which take place during and after the school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instruction is delivered primarily through the Workshop model and small group instruction using our curriculum map which is aligned to CCLS. Materials such as Smart Boards, big books, poems, leveled guided reading books, charts, manipulatives, word study and literacy station activities as well as books on tape/cd. We actively engage in differentiated tasks to foster the depth of discussions and increase independence across all areas of instruction. Tool kits and language supports are provided to all students to support small group work.Writing instruction is planned and paced according to a writing a curriculum map which is aligned to Common Core learning Standards. Writing Fundamentals materials provide further enrichment for instructional delivery in the area of writing, delivering models through touchstone texts. Phonics instruction is delivered in English through the Fundations program for grades K-2. Grades 3-5 uses word analysis during phonics instruction. The Dual Language also uses Estrellita, a Spanish phonics program during the literacy block. Go Math and Eureka are used to instruct students in mathematics and will be available in Spanish for the Dual Language classes. For English only assessments, Fountas and Pinnell is used to level readers. FOSS is a science curriculum that provides hands on materials in both English and Spanish. Our Social Studies program (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Social Studies New York City which is also available in Spanish for our Dual Language classes. All our curriculum resources support langugage-instruction. Hands-on manipulative creates an opportunity for teachers to attend to ELL student’s learning styles. Students work at their level and are assessed in order to meet their needs in a small group setting. All classrooms are equipped with Smart Boards, personal computers,laptops, listening centers, Leap Frog, access to IPads with various educational applications for expressive communication including explain everything, smart Amp, and verso, as well as students utilizing Google docs to complete writing assignments, and teachers trained to deliver ENL instruction with them. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Support Freestanding ENL Native Language Arts materials are available in Robin Hood Library, classroom libraries. The school personnel will provide native language support in translation services. Dual Language students will receive Language Arts and content area instruction using the 50:50 model. Students whose proficiency levels are entering and emerging receive 360 minutes per week of English as a Second Language. Students whose English proficiency level is transitioning and expanding receive 180 minutes per week of English as a Second Language.Finally commanding students, who are considered English proficient will still receive 90 minutes of ENL service per week.As mentioned previously the Literacy, Math, Social Studies, and Science curriculum materials are both readily available in English and Spanish. For state assessment purposes students will be offered to take the exam in their native language when possible, or through the use of a translator. For other formal assessments given in Spanish we utilize content unit tests in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In accordance with the ELPRG, required support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and all grade levels. Students are placed in the appropriate grade according to their age level. The number of minutes of ENL per student is based on the proficiency level and grade level. ENL support services are provided as per their English Proficiency Level, as per the ELPRG.l. Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes a week. Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes a week. Commanding receives 90 minutes a week. ELLs in all classrooms receive material in their appropriate grade level. ELLS are placed in age appropriate classes to effectively support all students. materials such as smart boards, big books, poems, leveled guided reading books, charts, word study and literacy station activities. We actively engage in differentiated tasks to foster the depth of instruction and increase independence across all areas of instruction. Tool kits and language scaffolding supports small group instruction. Students have access to IPADS with several educational apps, including Explain Everything, smart amp, Raz Kids, and MY ON support literacy development and language acquisition at all levels. All students are offered equal access to all school programs. For ELL students with disabilities, every teacher who services the student is required to read the IEP. All 408 paperwork is signed by all teachers who service the students with IEPs to acknowledge they have read it. This ensures that the student goals are reached and attained as per their IEP. 2018-19 CEP 86  Data spreadsheets are kept on Google drive containing all the academic and testing information for each student in the building. These spreadsheets can be accessed by all out of classroom personnel, classroom teachers and service providors. Centralizing the data to one specific location ensures all teachers are aware of each students academic needs and goals. All instruction is paced and provided through the common core learning standards which progress developmentally from grades K-5. Standards are paced and progressed throught he curriculum maps per grade and unit. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instruction is delivered primarily through the Workshop model. Teachers curriculum map aligned to CCLS with multiple resources to meet the varying levels of student needs.. Materials such as Smart Boards, big books, poems, leveled guided reading books, charts, manipulatives, word study and literacy station activities as well as books on tape/cd. We actively engage in differentiated tasks to foster the depth of discussions and increase independence across all areas of instruction. Tool kits and language supports are provided to all students to support small group work.Writing instruction is planned and paced according to a writing a curriculum map which is aligned to Common Core learning Standards. Writing Fundamentals materials provide further enrichment for instructional delivery in the area of writing. Phonics instruction is delivered in English through the Fundations program for grades K-2. Grades 3-5 uses word analysis during phonics instruction. The Dual Language also uses Estrellitas a Spanish phonics program during the literacy block. Go Math is is used to instruct students in mathematics and will be available in Spanish for the Dual Language classes. For English only assessments, Fountas and Pinnell is used to level readers. FOSS is a science curriculum that provides hands on materials in both English and Spanish. Our Social Studies program (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Social Studies New York City which is also available in Spanish for our Dual Language classes. Hands-on manipulatives create an opportunity for teachers to attend to ELL student’s learning styles. Students work at their level and are assessed in order to meet their needs in a small group setting. All classrooms are equipped with Smart Boards, personal computers,laptops, listening centers, Leap Frog, access to IPads with various educational Applications, as well as students utilizing special Applications to complete writing assignments, Time For Kids subscription and teachers trained to deliver ENL instruction with them. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school’s bilingual Parent Coordinator helps guide and assist newly ELL students and families towards community based services and opportunities before the beginning of the school year. She also organizes and facilitates bilingual family events within the school during the school year, throughout the Fall/Winter and Spring. We plan many activities for ELLs from the beginning to the end of the school year in order to help build bridges with home and ensure cultural acclamation. In the early fall the parent coordinator plans and hosts a parent orientation to welcome parents for newly incoming pre-K and kindergarten families. In September the PTA and PC also host parent workshop for parents who have children with IEPs, as well as, a literacy workshop for parents, which is continued once a month, throughout the school year. Other Fall Parent Orientation meetings are planned by the ESL team, which included a Parent "Make and Take" workshops, for Back to School Night, as well as, a parent workshop for emergent ELL reading and writing strategies for ELLs in grades K-5. In later fall we planned a, "bring your male role model to school" and students celebrated these role models in the classroom. We also have planned our annual pajama party, our BOO BASH fall dance festivities to help build community and assist Ells. We also sponsor a Fall and Spring Arts and Crafts night, as well as the annual winter holiday fair, and Spring holiday fair. These fall/winter events help bring parents into our building and make them part of the learning process as well as assist Ells in the acclamation of newly Throughout the year many family fun nights such as arts night, game night, and pajama night, are all offered throughout the school year for all families to attend with their children. These events motivate our students and helps build a support and strong connections with our families. The parent coordinator conducts a parent Literacy Workshop once a month. The homework help program is also offered after school in the library to assist families who are challenged in English Literacy to assist their children with grade level content while assisted by the librarian. In the spring we have a cultural pot luck dinner planned by te parent coordinator and the PTA president. The teachers and 2018-19 CEP 87  the parents each volunteer to bring a cultural plate to share. The parent Coordinator and PTA also plan an Arts and Crafts night for the spring as wellas the spring fair and plant sale. In late May we are planning a ZUMBA night for parents too come in Parents are invited to visit our school website. The ENL page provides many resources and supports for students and families to use prior to the beginning of the school year. Here at P.S 16 we understand the relevance of building home school connections between parents and the school. We encourage parental participation and encourage their feedback. We encourage parental involvement both during the school, inside our classrooms, and after school. These elements are embedded into our curriculum maps Here at P.S 16 we understand the relevance of building home school connections between parents and the school. We encourage parental participation and encourage their feedback. We encourage parental involvement both during the school, inside our classrooms, and after school. These elements are embedded into our curriculum maps 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently language electives are not offered at P.S.16. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Language is separated for instruction in accordance with the 50:50 (On -Off) bi- weekly model, with cluster preps as the sole exception. The dual language program is currently in kindergarten through fifth grade. The dual language program is self-contained in grades K-2 and departmentalized for reading, writing, and math in grades 3-5 with the , it is done by the bi-weekly model. Beginning September 2016 the dual language classes were departmentalized for reading, writing and math grades 3-5, within the dual language department, utilizing the same dual language teacher for each content, reading, writing, and math. There is a 50:50 (On -Off) bi- weekly model of Spanish/English, with cluster preps as the sole exception. Students will receive content area instruction- including Literacy, Math, Science, and Social Studies in both languages, alternating by week. Across all grades, ENLs and EPs will use target languages (English- Spanish) bi weekly, and ENLs and EPs are integrated heterogeneously throughout the entire instructional day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During PD time (Monday afternoons 2:45- 4:00 p.m)) all staff will engage in Professional Development that is aligned to Common Core Standards. All professional development includes supports and strategies for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). All assistant principals, ENL Pedagogues, ENL coordinator, teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, parent coordinators and secretaries receive PD through our borough field support center and the Division of English Language Learners and Student Service.Also, our Triad relationship with P.S 22 and P.S 41 highlights our engagement with Learning Partners Program (LPP). Together with our Triad, we use data to develop practices that focuses on needed improvement within a target area. Our work around student to student discussions around text will continue to deepen. In addition, in the 2017-18 school year we will extend the learning around listening and speaking skills Topics covered during this Professional Development are turn- keyed to colleagues and staff during teacher led Professional 2018-19 CEP 88  Development and collaborative meeting and planning time throughout each grade. A projected calendar of Professional dates have been planned as per the calendar/timeline of PD events below: Anticipated Professional Development September - -Goals and Timelines -Review testing data (NYS exams) (NYSESLAT) - Curriculum Pacing Calendar - -Benchmark dates, chapter tests, etc. for Math, Reading, Writing -Student Goals (ENL)- -what students need to do to demonstrate goal & timelineSeptember Curriculum Mapping/ Collaborative Planning grades K-5 (Ells small group)October - Teacher Led: Go Math alignment to Eureka, Unit Planning (Ells language objective)October -Teacher Led: Go Math alignment to Eureka, Unit Planning (Ells language objective)October Crisis De-escalation Orientation ( ENLs crisis De Escalation)November Enhancing Discussion Toolkits : question structures for ELLsNovember- (Election Day) ENL: Introduce the new regulations -CR part 154 share the LAPNovember Teacher led- PD 1- Using Technology in small Groups- Beginner/Intermediate PD 2 -ELL Strategies- Second Language Acquisition PD 3 - My Library NYC - Supporting all students in the libraryNovember - K-2 making thinking visible (ell strategies) 3-5 MTV share out, build on for writing (ell strategies)November- Smart AMP November Core Collaborative: Introduction PD overview of key conceptsDecember - All teachers K-5 TEQ Online PD- (ENL tech in small groups)December - ELA Curriculum Mapping/ Collaborative Planning /Unit PlanningDecember - Administrative: Conflict of InterestJanuary Core Collaborative:January Unit Planning (ENL differentiated tasks)January Math Core Collaborative-February ECER Technology, Ell StrategiesFebruary - Teq Pd,collaborative PlanningFebruary - Smart AmpMarch - Deepening Discussion, Collaborative PlanningMarch - Math Collaborative Planning, Project Based Planning (backward Planning), Standards based instructionMarch - Math Core Collaborative, Guided Reading, Teq OnlineMarch - Teq Online, Test administration 3-5,Student Led Discussions k-2April - Teq Online, LPPApril - Assessment to drive Instruction, Math Core CollaborativeApril- Math Core Collaborative, Small group InstructionMay - Harmony Training, Orton GillinghamMay -Orton Gillingham, Small GroupsMay - ENL team meeting, Collaborative planningMay - Math Core CollaborativeJune- Math Core CollaborativeJune- LPP-trends and data collection Teachers of ELLS will receive PD in house and at the Staten Island Borough field support center. Professional Development in house will be delivered by licensed ENL pedagogues through borough field support centers including the Office of English Language Learner and student service.All teachers of English Language Learners in 2016/17 will engage in a weekly book club which focuses on learning second language acquisition strategies for ENLs. Currently the ENL book club meets to analyze the book, “Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning”. This book focuses on strategies which align with our schools Learning/instructional focus to develop in depth discussions for our Ells. It provides strategies on scaffolding language and learning for English Language Learners across all grades and content areas and aligns itself with elements from the common core standards.ENL teachers attend a 3 day at Staten Island Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) to engage ENL teachers in creating language objectives through SIOP. Also ENL teachers attended several workshops focusing on co teaching, planning and collaboration. All trends and instructional goals for LPP are turn-keyed to vertically to staff K-5.There is constant editing and re-aligning of our curriculum maps to the pacing of Engage NY and the sequence of common core standards. This ensures that we always return to CCLS to prepare our professional development to focus our instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 16 offers the staff support to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school through workshops conducted by our bilingual parent coordinator, Rita Maniglia Diaz. Interpretation services will also be offered by the office of translation and interpretation.Every year parents are invited to participate in an information session where they are walked through the entire middle school application process. Parents are informed of their options and upcoming deadlines in their language of preferred choice, in order to ensure a stress free transition. Parents also have the opportunity to ask questions to guest speakers such as neighboring middle school principals. Families are encouraged to attend open houses in middle schools that they may be considering for their child. Middle School tours are also available to students and their families to ease their transition. Partnerships with middle schools are supported by Spanish speaking ENL teachers. An agenda is provided for every Professional Development that is attended by our staff. A sign in Sheet is also kept in order to track attendance by all staff at 2018-19 CEP 89  professional development meetings. We will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S 16 conducts an initial parent orientation, quarterly progress meetings to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Individual meetings with parents of ELLs will be held on Tuesdays during the parent involvement time. ENL teachers will meet mostly with the parents of struggling ELLs. Strategies and handouts will be given to provide support. Translations will be provided as requested by the parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Continuing throughout the 2017-2018 school year, ENL teachers, Dual Language teachers, and the school Librarian will facilitate parent workshops to increase the knowledge of second language acquisition, assistance to their children at home with reading and writing, as well as assistance with the communication with the classroom teacher. Parent workshops are held ongoing throughout the entire school year and translation services are offered at all workshops. Some of the parent workshop topics are as follows, “Making the Middle School Choice”, “ELL Parent Orientation”, “Pre-K Parent Orientation, “Kindergarten Parent Orientation”, “Help Your Child Adjust to Pre-K and Kindergarten” “Safety Workshop”, “NYS ELA and Math Exams”, “Homework and Study Habits”, “Your Child’s Learning Style.” The workshops are designed based on parents’ feedback. Parents are also invited to school wide and individual classroom celebrations, such as writing, math, and cultural celebrations. There are also several family participation nights where parents are also invited to family game night, movie, crafts and pajama night. Translation services are provided throughout all activities in various languages that are needed. Information prior to these events is also sent home in various languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S 16 has engaged in a triad of schools focusing on improving instruction for ENL students, this program is called Learning Partners Program (LPP). The LPP was envisioned by schools chancellor Carmen Farina in order to create teacher leaders that share practices and set goals for ENL students to reach proficiency. Our learning focus area was to deepen student discussion during small group work. During this school year teacher collaboration has improved and student discussion increased by 25%, of all ENL students based on this work from LPP. 2018-19 CEP 90  2018-19 CEP 91 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michele Ramos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 92  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Public School 16 School DBN: 31R016 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michele Ramos Title Principal Christopher Allen Assistant Principal Rita Maniglia-Diaz Parent Coordinator Tara McGuigan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tina Collucci Parent Lara Scaringella Teacher/Subject Area Sally Martinez Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A J. Colon A. Lodico Nilda Kraft N/A N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Mildred Cordova Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 June 27, 2016 N/A N/A June 27, 2016 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 93  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R016 School Name: Public School 16R Superintendent: Vincenza Gallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rita Diaz-Maniglia Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S. 16, written translation and oral interpretation needs are determined using multiple criteria. Upon registration of all new admits, we have parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey. Parents are requested to check off the languages that are spoken at home. This enables us to identify both the ELL services needed for students as well as the different languages in our school community. Certified ENL Personnel meet with all the parents of the new admits who have been identified as in need of ENL instruction. She/He determines if the parents are in need of translation and interpretation services. When parents visit the main office, the Parent Coordinator and the Pupil Accounting Secretary inform the school of any parent who may need further support communicating in English. Our Parent Coordinator meets and greets parents at morning arrival and afternoon dismissal, as well as at school events, and keeps us informed of their concerns and needs. All staff are informed and regularly supported in appropriate communication with all parents in order to ensure that necessary and important information is shared. 2018-19 CEP 94  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish -178 Albanian - 1 Arabic - 7 Bengali - 16 Tamil- 4 Ewe - 1 Russian-1 Chinese - 1 Dutch-1 Turkish- 1 Hindi - 1 English - 276 X 90 x 90 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 95  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Since our largest population has indicated Spanish as their language of preference, all communication distributed to families is sent home in both English and Spanish. If parents request in their home language, other than Spanish, we do our best to ensure that proper communication in their language is provided. Written translation services for documents such as letters, notices, flyers, permission slips, consent forms, parent handbooks, hearings, suspension letters and any other information needed to be disseminated to an ELL parent or any other written communication will be provided in their native language whenever possible. Translations are completed by school staff members or we utilize the services provided by the NYCDOE Translation Department. Timely provision documents needed for translation are translated a week before the documents need to be distributed. Therefore all documents, English and other languages, are all given out at the same time. September, ongoing at registration translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have several staff to support our largest second language spoken, Spanish, who translate as needed. In addition, we utilize the DOE translation and interpretation resources available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Back to school night: September September Parent Teacher Conferences: November, January (as needed for PID), March Spring Open School Night: May Parent Engagement: Every Tuesday November, January plan to provide interpretation service(s)? - By school staff - Through Translation & Interpretation Services 2018-19 CEP 96  The school has a bilingual Guidance Counsellor to support families as needed. March Bilingual Parent Coordinator supports translation both orally and in writing as needed. May Every Tuesday 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We make every effort to provide parents with communication in their home language, especially in the event of an emergency. We have staff support, other parents support as well as the access and use of the translation/interpretation phone lines. We have School Messenger which sends specific messages to the entire school or groups of families via phone or text. We also communicate to the school community via the school website which provides translation of many of our documents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At opening September Faculty conference, all staff will review Chancellor's Regulations A-663 Staff is met with regularly to review procedures and protocols for any new admits and/or long term supports Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translation is provided as deemed necessary from ATS and other in-take documentation as well as when parents specifically request support. We will continue to translate all notifications based on parent preference both written and orally. The parent coordinator and ESL staff will consistently document and support parent translations as needed. 2018-19 CEP 97  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys will be utilized as well through SLT and PTA measures of communication in order to ensure all families are supported and provided the necessary language access across written and verbal means of communication. 2018-19 CEP 98 
