2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R021 School Name: P.S. 21 MARGARET EMERY-ELM PARK Principal: ANTHONY COSENTINO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School 353100010021 K - 5 168 Hooker Place 718-816-3300 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 31R021 718-816-3305 Fax: Anthony Cosentino acosentino@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Anthony Cosentino Melissa Neglia Claudia Garzon-Jara Danielle Delia RosaDeJesus NA NA District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mr. Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, New York 10301 ALodico@schools.nyc.goc Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Petrides FSC: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten island, New York 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7185568367 Phone Number: 7183916109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Cosentino Melissa Neglia Claudia Garzon-Jara NA Rosa DeJesus NA NA NA Kevin Hazzard *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ValerieNobile Danielle Guerriero Rosa DeJesus RocioRivera Stephanie Reed Christine Crespo NA NA NA NA NA Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 21’s mission is to challenge students to achieve their personal best and empower them to become productive, independent members of society. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our collaborative learning teams provide standards-based curriculum utilizing real life experiences embedded in data-driven instruction. We, the staff of P.S. 21, commit to partnering with parents and community members to maximize each everyone's potential. To utilize the ICCARE model effectively, the Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School will:  Facilitate high levels of parent and community engagement, and ensure representation of all stakeholders in prioritizing school-wide goals  Utilize local community resources to create a true partnership school within the community  Build staff capacity, foster distributive leadership practices, and develop a cohesive, strong, and supportive school community  Cultivate a culture of trust, respect, inquiry, collaboration, quality, and valued instructional feedback aligned with fair and credible evaluations, recognition of accomplishments by all, and social emotional intelligence by strategically aligning leadership behaviors with stated core values and school goals  Use data from multiple sources to set rigorous learning goals and to maximize student achievement  Leverage deep knowledge of rigorous curriculum, instruction, and assessment to accelerate learning for all students  Manage resources and operations to improve student learning 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 21 is a Title 1 School Wide Program District 31 school with a diverse student population. The ethnic breakdown is approximately 10% white, 57% Hispanic, 30% Black and 1% Asian. Approximately 33% of our students are students with disabilities and 15% are English Language Learners. The school has 14 classes ranging from Kindergarten through Grade 5 with two sections on each grade and two self-contained classes. Students attending P.S. 21 are engaged with a rigorous curriculum in ELA, Math, Social Studies, Science, and the Arts. English as a New Language, and AIS services are provided as push in and pull out supports throughout the school day. Every student in our school has an opportunity to study Visual Art, Drama, Music, STEM, and Physical Education. Our partnership with Education through Music provides our students with an opportunity to work with music education experts resulting in multiple student musical performances throughout the year. Our visual arts program culminates in an annual art fair. P.S.21 uses Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) to foster a culture of high expectations, student ownership, and positive social interactions. The school uses SPARK as its PBIS acronym to reinforce our core values: keeping ourselves and others Safe, having Positive attitudes, acting Responsibly, showing Respect to others, and showing acts of Kindness. Ps 21 won the Respect for All award in 2016 and is certified in School Digital Citizenship. Using The Framework for Great Schools as a resource to improve student achievement, P.S. 21 strategically provides opportunities for collaboration amongst staff members resulting in professional growth. A differentiated approach to professional development is cultivated by distributive staff leadership including but not excluded to lesson studies, collaborative learning teams, and intervisitations. Through weekly horizontal inquiry meetings, vertical instructional team meetings and intervisitations, teachers are engaged in professional discussions and resulting in more effective planning, differentiation, and genuine professional discussions to promote student achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  P.S. 21 has three allocated full-time ENL teachers that provide push -in and pull-out services for English Language Learners. ELL students participate in a Title III funded after school program for grades K-5 to target areas of need. The Title III program will target beginner, intermediate and advanced ELL students across the elementary grades that are in need of academic English Language Development. Classes are provided in English with ENL strategic instruction incorporated in all lessons. The program addresses all four modalities of language development and acquisition (listening, speaking, reading and writing), but will mainly focus on reading and writing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, the PS 21 school community made the most progress in the Framework for Great Schools elements "Strong Family-Community Ties" increasing from 3.67 (2016-2017) to 4.14 and "Rigorous Instruction" increasing from 3.04 (2016-2017) to 3.94 (2017-2018). Specific data points from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide include but are not excluded to: Teacher Responses: 100% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. 100% of social studies/science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. 95% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. 95% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to link the standards from previous grades to current grade so student knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts. 95% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to develop students’ conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context. 93% of teachers say that students show that they respect each other's ideas. 100% of teachers say that they adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and backgrounds positively. 100% of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELLs) proficiency and students with disabilities). 100% of teachers say that they develop appropriate Individualized Education Programs for their students with disabilities. 100% of teachers say that they use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life. 100% of teachers say that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the development needs and learning interests of all their students. 96% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. 2018-19 CEP 11  93% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. 96% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherent. 93% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. 93% of teachers say that adults at their school teach critical thinking skills to students. 100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. 96% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. 93% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. 96% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. 100% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students' needs 100% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn 100% of teachers say that they feel respected by the principal. 100% of teachers say that the principal has confidence in the expertise of the teachers at their school. Family Responses: 98% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. 98% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. 97% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 97% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 99% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. 97% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. 98% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. 98% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. 2018-19 CEP 12  99% of families say that they feel respected by their child's principal. 99% of families say that they trust the principal. 99% of families say that the principal at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with families like them. 100% of families say that they feel respected by their child's teachers. 97% of families say that teachers and families think of each other as partners in educating children. Areas of Focus for the 2018-2019 school year:  Clearly communicate lesson-specific learning targets and success criteria supported by aligned anchor charts and self-reflection exit tasks to support student self-assessment capacity to evaluate where they are in their learning progress and determine their next steps.  Refine and enhance student discussions through student discussion techniques such as Socratic Seminar, Turn and Talk, and other student discussion protocols.  Utilize formative assessments techniques to tailor and personalize instruction to meet all students' needs.  Enhance and build our progress monitoring tools As per the School Quality Guide: 68% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions. 68% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class 68% of teachers say that students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers. 71% of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion. 71% of teachers say that students use data or text references to support their ideas. 82 % of teachers say that students participate in class discussions at some point. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R021 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 367 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 47 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 16.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 59.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 36.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YSH NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 62 62 4 89.4% 1.6% 35.4% 27.0% 1.1% 1.4% 2 3% 11.7 28.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive needs assessment was conducted. The following summative assessments were used: ● Diagnostic Reading Assessment (DRA) ● New York State Standardized 2018 Test results in English Language Arts (ELA) and Math ● New York State Identification Test for English language Learners (NYSITELL) ● School-based Inquiry Benchmarks ● Post Unit tests for ELA and Social Studies ● School Quality Guide ● Classroom Observations ● Quality Review (2017-2018) (QR) According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, our school received proficient in QR indicator 1.2 - Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. The school is implementing systems and structures to ensure a cohesive set of beliefs grounded in best practices is consistently reflected in a vast majority of the classrooms across grade levels and subject areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 15  By June 2019, as a result of integrating the instructional shifts into all mathematics units of study across grade levels, there will be a 3% increase in the percentage of students reaching proficiency (level 3 and above) on the NYS Math exam as measured by the 2019 NYC School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? General Education Teacher Special Education Teacher Paraprofessionals Administration  Create a schedule of intervisitations to norm All Staff expectations on student engagement and to deepen staff understanding of Danielson Component 3B.  Teacher lesson plans will reflect differentiated instruction.  Teacher will monitor student goals and student portfolios.  Teachers will use informal and formal assessments to adjust instruction and curriculum modifications.  Teachers will participate in learning communities which include intervisitations, lesson studies, collaborative inquiry, and professional learning/sharing.  Students will use accountable talk stems, engage in Socratic Seminar and answer questions to promote critical thinking..  Professional development topics will include how to build student engagement, and use data to drive instruction effectively. November 2018-June 2019 on a monthly basis daily daily daily weekly 2018-19 CEP 17   Teachers will use a variety of protocols to drive classroom discussions.  Administration will conduct frequent informal visits on instruction and provide targeted feedback using the Danielson Framework. daily Mondays during PD time (September 2018-June 2019) daily October 2018-June 2019 (monthly)  Teachers will plan for differentiated instruction based on the modality needs (listening, reading, writing, speaking) of the English Language Learner.  Teachers will provide and front load content-based ENL Learners September 2018-June 2019 on a daily basis Administration, Classroom Teachers and ENL Teachers vocabulary to the students.  Teachers and students will construct anchor charts and visuals for the student reference .  Teachers will provide sentence starters to support student discussions.  Teachers will provide manipulatives for children to work with in conjunction with the SOLVE method. 2018-19 CEP 18  Teachers will provide supports for the SOLVE method, including graphic organizers and other language supports.  Teachers will plan for Differentiated instruction.  Teachers will provide and front load content-based vocabulary to the students.  Teachers and student will construct anchor charts and visuals for the student reference .  Teachers will provide sentence starters to support student discussions.  Teachers will provide manipulatives for children to work in conjunction with the SOLVE method.  Teachers will provide supports for the SOLVE method, including graphic organizers. Students with Disabilities September 2018-June 2019 on a daily basis Administration, Classroom Teachers and ENL Teachers  Teachers will keep open communication with parents Parents using the REMIND app.  Teachers will provide parents with a bi-monthly progress report  Literacy INC will provide families with professional development workshops on the common core, rigorous instruction, and other community-related topics.  The school will provide after school programs for students. Administration, Parent Coordinator September 2018 -June 2019 on a regular basis bi-monthly monthly October 2017-June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 19  Teachers will keep open communication with parents using the REMIND app.  Teachers will provide parent with a bi-monthly progress report  Change for Kids will provide families with professional development workshops on the common core, rigorous instruction, and other community-related topics. Parents  Daily/As needed  Bi-monthly (September 2018 - June 2019)  During the months of September 2018, November 2018, and March 2019  October 2018 through  The school will provide after school programs May 2019 for students. Administration, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Textbooks, Technology, Small group instruction, cluster teachers, Graphic organizers, Computers, Smartboards, Protocols, f-status art and drama teachers, AIS, music teacher provided by Education through Music, all teachers have an additional prep period in their programs to specifically engage in collaborative inquiry. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the ongoing effort to as a result of integrating the instructional shifts into all mathematics units of study across grade levels, there will be a 3% increase in student achievement from October to February as per the EdPerformance Benchmark Assessments in Math.  Teachers will monitor for student progress by using exit slips, formal and informal assessment tools.  Teachers will use constructive feedback from administration to adjust and improve instruction for discussion.  Administration will provide timely feedback as well as professional resources for teachers to support their growth as a professional.  Teachers will use inquiry benchmarks to measure success. fall (October 2018 math baseline, November 2018 math benchmark), and spring (February 2019) benchmarks to assess the students’ needs in individual common core standards. In February 2019, the Math benchmark taken by students in grades 3-5 will be used to measure the school's progress towards meeting the annual goal.   2017-2018 State Exam Item Skills Analysis, June instructional reports, and data from the NY State Education website will help teachers plan and implement multiple inquiry cycles on choosing students who have a need, identifying the need, and addressing the learning opportunity. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 20   EdPerformance Benchmark Assessments in Math (October, December, February, May)    Administrative coaching visits and observations Cycles Inquiry Assessments - Cycle 1 - October (Baseline), November (midpoint) December (Summative measure) Inquiry Assessments - Cycle 2 - January (Baseline), February (midpoint) March (Summative measure) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Priority Needs: According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: 63% of teachers felt that discipline is applied fairly in their school. 82% of teacher say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social emotional learning opportunities. 89% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention controlling their emotions on managing their thinking, behavior and feelings.) School’s strengths (School Quality Guide): 100% of teachers say that they adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and backgrounds positively. 100% of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities). 100% of teachers say that they develop appropriate Individual Education Programs for their students with disabilities. 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. 100% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that students are safe in their class(es). 95% of staff will be trained in Therapeutic Crisis Interventions in Schools by the UFT Positive Learning Collaborative PBIS coach will teach grades K and 1 in PBIS approaches to making positive choices PBIS "SPARK" will be displayed throughout the school building Organized recess play Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 22  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of 95% of teachers completing TCIS-training as part of completing PBIS training through the United Federation of Teachers Positive Learning Collaborative program, there will be a 10% decrease in percentage of level 4 and 5 infractions as measured by the June 2019 OORS Occurrence Summary. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research based instructional programs : Implementing Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports The school will: All Students 9/18-10/18 10/18-11/18 General Education Teacher Special Education Teacher attend staff workshops  teachers attend TCIS training led by the UFT   promote a rewards points system, "SPARK"   use multi tier model of service delivery  use research based, scientifically validated intervene with a crisis interventions to the extent available  monitor student progress to inform intervention  use voice level chart in the hallways, classroom, dining room, bathroom, auditorium and all areas of the school building  use data to make decisions  use assessment for: screening of data o o diagnostic determination of data o progress monitoring  conduct a "Kick off" assembly for students and families  provide teachers will lesson plans about behavior expectations. Some lessons include: recess expectations o o hallway/line expectations o dining room expectations o bathroom expectations o classroom expectations  practice Sanford Harmony as an extension of PBIS in the classroom with small groups of students to enhance peer relationships Paraprofessionals 11/18-12/18 School Aides Administration 12/18-1/18 Parent Coordinator PBIS Team 1/19-2/19 2/19-3/19 3/19-4/19 4/19-5/19 5/19-6/19 2018-19 CEP 24 Paraprofessionals calcuate weekly the number of SPARK tickets students earned. Weekly PBIS lesson from one of our PBIS coaches for grades K and 1.  Provide parent workshops on PBIS: Parents Sept. 2018 o What is PBIS? o How can my child benefit long term? o How can I, as a parent, become involved? Students bring “SPARK” tickets home for parents Invite parents to award assemblies    What is Sanford Harmony? Teachers, Parent Coordinators, Administration Monthy PBIS Team celebrations for our "SPARK" students  TCIS Training  Sanford Harmony implementation 1st thing in the morning and after lunch Teachers Sept. 2018 PBIS Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  What is PBIS?  We will provide parent workshops on our positive behavior intervention systems (PBIS). Activities will include defining PBIS, identifying the positive long term developmental benefits, and creating home-to-school connections. We will further hold PBIS "SPARK" assemblies to celebrate students who earn "SPARK" tickets and have strong attendance. Parent representatives will join our PBIS team and attend monthly meetings Parents *PBIS-In September, 2018 during Teachers, Parent Coordinators, Administration 2018-19 CEP 25  Other events will include but are not excluded to: Family Math, ELA and or STEM   Parent workshop: What is Sanford Harmony?  Parent Workshops provided by community-based organizations such as NYC Health Department, SIMH, Project Hospitality, and El Centro.  Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) Parent/Teacher Curriculum Conference September, 2018 through June, 2019 (schedule posted on school website) *Workshops-November, 2018 and on-going *TCIS-December, 2018 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. "Think it Through" form Spark menu (points system)  parent workshops  PBIS lesson plans voice level charts   Behavior chart matrix  Behavior flow chart    Class pass (points system)   points sheet (student responsibility)  PBIS team weekly meetings     TCIS training provided by the UFT Spark report (positive feedback) thermometer to display monthly progress Sanford Harmony strategies: first thing in the morning and after lunch SWIS system being used to help track and analyze specific students and behaviors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in incidents from January 2018 in Levels 2 and 3 incidents reported in Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) with the implementation of a schoolwide PBIS (Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports) system designed to support student growth in social, emotional and academic needs while enhancing peer relationships and more trained staff with TCIS. We will use the Incident Level and Infraction Summary Chart to measure the amount of incidents of Levels 2 and 3 for the mid-point benchmark. 2018-19 CEP 26   We formed a partnership with the UFT Positive Learning Collaborative with a focus on restorative circles, conflict mediation and advancing equity.  Each classroom will collect “SPARK” points as a class, hung and displayed on a classroom thermometer and or a “SPARK”. Students collect “SPARK” tickets.   Parents are given the “SPARK” ticket.   Students will be celebrated at monthly Family, Math, ELA and or Stem activity time. Students will earn special rewards, privileges and prizes for receiving “SPARK” tickets daily, weekly and or monthly.  Classes will receive rewards as a whole when rewarded together.  PBIS team will use the SWIS system to track and analyze occurrences happening throughout the school day with specific students.  A "Girls Group" and "Boys Group" will help with peer mediation.  Operation Respect will work with students in grades 2, 3, 4 and 5 on conflict resolution and peer mediation.  2 day a week SAPIS worker  PBIS coach will help with peer mediation and conflict resolution. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports including Incident Levels, Infraction Summary Chart Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths: Based on our Quality Review on December 20, 2017, our area of celebration recognized our "strategic use of long-term partnerships, allocation of resources, and effective placement of staff and students and programming are well aligned to the school’s mission and goals." - Staff members hold themselves accountable for promoting learning opportunities leading to college and career readiness and effectively using resources to support student progress as evident in meaningful student work products.Horizontal Teacher Teams meet weekly to analyze student work, discuss data and plan lessons (PPO, School Quality Guide). - Horizontal Teacher Teams meet weekly to formulate instructional goals collaboratively and align curriculum resources to meet student needs (PPO, School Quality Guide). - Additional teacher teams such as Wellness and Lighthouse focus on enriching the curriculum (teacher feedback survey). School Learning Opportunities: - Incorporate more time for all impact teams to examine student data and adjust lesson and unit outlines accordingly (teacher feedback survey, PPO) - Create systems of accountability and self-assessment for impact teams to monitor their impact on student learning (PPO) - Vertical impact Teams meet weekly to identify weaknesses in the curriculum, investigate resources and design the implementation for improvements/enhancements (PPO). One area of focus for this year is aligned with Quality Review indicator 3.4 - Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. School leaders and staff will establish a culture for learning through professional development, ongoing feedback, and using protocols to analyze student work via collaborative learning teams. The expectations for learning and success will be communicated to the teachers, students and families to ensure that all students are prepared for the expectations of the Common Core Standards (grades 6-8) and for college and career readiness. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of 95% of PS 21 students participating in at least three different student discussion protocols, there will be a 3% increase in the percentage of students reaching proficiency (level 3 or level 4) on the NYS ELA exam as measured by the 2019 NYC School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will participate in professional development aligned with using assessments to drive instruction and determine next steps for students.  Professional development on UDL strategies and using formative assessment to differentiate for all learners.  Teachers will participate in intervisitations to share best practices and plan strategies to improve student achievement.  Monthly progress reports for families  Monthly families invitations to the classroom to learn about Math, Literacy and STEM  Monthly progress reports are sent home  REMIND app: parent/teacher collaboration All Teaching staff/Grade level teams  Monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) All Classroom teachers, AIS personnel Administration, classroom teachers, service providers Parents  bimonthly (September 2018 - June 2019)  bimonthly (September 2018 - June 2019)  bimonthly (September 2018 - June 2019)  daily (September 2018 - June 2019)  Teachers will be held accountable for the implementation of decisions and suggestions made during Inquiry Team Meetings and Lesson Study to improve daily planning. All Teaching staff/Grade level teams  weekly (September 2018 - June 2019) Administration, classroom teachers, service providers 2018-19 CEP 30  A team of teacher leaders will participate in the Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) designed to improve school culture and capacity by training teachers to lead collaborative inquiry teams. All Teaching staff/Grade level teams  monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) Administration, classroom teachers, service providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The following structures exist to empower and inform our parents/families in the ongoing education of our students:  Monthly progress reports will be shared with families.  Monthly family classroom invitations to Parents *Monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) *Monthly (schedule posted on school website) (September 2018 - June 2019) participate in Math, Literacy and/or STEM activities. *Monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) Administration, classroom teachers, service providers  Homework and updates on student progress are communicated to parents/families via the REMIND app. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment *On a daily basis and/or as needed (September 2018 - June 2019) Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development on using assessment data to drive instruction Professional articles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the ongoing effort to have 95% of PS 21 students participating in at least three different student discussion protocols, there will be a 3% increase in student achievement from October to February as per the EdPerformance Benchmark Assessments in ELA. 2018-19 CEP 31  The following systems and structures will support the above goal: Inquiry Assessments - Cycle 1 - October (Baseline), November (midpoint) December (Summative measure) Inquiry Assessments - Cycle 2 - January (Baseline), February (midpoint) March (Summative measure)  EdPerformance Benchmark Assessments in ELA and Math (October, December, February, May)  Diagnostic Reading Assessments (September, January, May)    Weekly Inquiry Team Cycles  Monthly PD logs and reflections based on schoolwide, individual teacher and grade-level goals   Administrative coaching visits and observations Cycles Inter visitation cycles Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Unit assessments, inquiry benchmarks, teacher observation ratings via the ADVANCE system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Program coherence, where we received positive responses at a 93% rate (School Quality Guide), greater than the citywide by 7 percentage points and the district average by 2 percentage points. 100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 96% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. 100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. 96% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. 93% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. Data supporting this learning opportunity: In our 2017-2018 School Quality Review, it was determined that our area of focus is area 1.2, developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all the learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. In this rating, we received a rating of "Proficient." 89% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms. (2017-2018 School Quality Guide) 89% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials. 86% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. 89% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. 86% of teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. Action plan: • Instructional Rounds (intervisitations) 2018-19 CEP 33  • Impact Team curriculum planning including tiered assessments in alignment with CCLS progressions. • Informal teacher observations • Analysis of trends from MOTP (ADVANCE system) • Professional development on creating progressions for all Common Core anchor standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of 90% of the teaching staff planning and facilitating a professional learning opportunity for colleagues on and/or across grade levels, there will be a 2% increase in the average teacher rating in 4E of the Danielson Framework as measured by the 2019 end of year summative ratings in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly lesson study sessions will occur during common planning periods All Students - Weekly (September 2018 - June 2018) General Education Teacher Special Education Teacher Paraprofessionals Administration  Student work analysis will be done by teachers every Tuesday afternoon, and one time throughout the week designated for “Inquiry” time  During TLP meetings, teachers will be engaged with professional text study  PD will be provided for the staff: o Framework for Great Schools o using multiple emasures to customize instructional planning and influence schoolwide decision-making. o Danielson Framework o (These PDs will help teachers to achieve higher levels of performance of the Danielson Rubric)  Opportunities and adjustments of resources, including programs (Schoolwide) and personnel  Teacher will attend Core Collaborative Math and Reading learning sessions  Teachers and paraprofessionals will provide feedback on all professional developments attended Monitor teacher accountability and plan for differentiated professional development as it contributes to student achievement. Literacy Inc Workshops   Curriculum conferences  Tuesday parent communication time  Parent teacher conferences  Monthly progress reports  Monthly newsletter Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teach Parents weekly (September 2018 - June 2018) Sept., Nov., March, May 2018-19 CEP 35  weekly (September 2018 - June 2018) 4x/year (September, November, March, May) -monthly (September 2018 - June 2018) -monthly (September 2018 - June 2018) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide the following empowering and informational opportunities for our parents/families:  Curriculum conferences  Tuesday parent communication time  New York State assessment overview: how to prepare, etc.  Parent teacher conferences  Monthly progress reports  Monthly newsletter  Parent Workshops  Monthly School Leadership Team  Monthly PTA Meetings  Encourage parents to become members of the PTA, SLT, Title I representative, etc. *LINC Dates: 9/12, 9/13,10/10, 11/14, 11/17, 12/12, 1/19, 3/2, 6/12) *September, November, March and May *2:30p.m. – 3:00 p.m. every Tuesday Parents *September, November, March and May Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers *Monthly *Released 1st of every month 2018-19 CEP 36  *schedule posted on school website *schedule posted on school website *schedule posted on school website Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Professional Development on Danielson ● Professional Development Series on Using Assessment in more informal ways ● Professional Development on Lesson Study ● Inquiry Grade Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, to increase teacher effectiveness, 100% of teachers will be observed and there will be a 2% increase in the average of combined Highly Effective and Effective individual teacher ratings for individual observations on component 4e and 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching_. The mid-year ratings will be reviewed with teachers during January midyear support meetings including revisions of individual teacher pd plans as applicable. ● Monitoring for results sheets will be reviewed at the end of every Unit in Math and ELA ● DRA results will be analyzed in November, March and June. ● Lesson plans will be monitored for differentiation and rigorous instruction. ● Debrief of teacher feedback sheets will promote a discussion with the administration ● Teachers share best practices and their expertise to build capacity within the school building.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 37  Unit assessments, inquiry benchmarks, teacher observation ratings via the ADVANCE system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths: ● Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Family Worker, multiple bilingual staff members ● School website, www.ps21statenisland.org ● Use of the REMIND app ● International Festival ● Career Day ● 30,000 Degrees partnership with IS 51, Port Richmond Community High School, and Wagner College. ● State grants funding after school programming with Community-based organizations New York Center for Interpersonal Development and United Activities Unlimited. ● First District 31 school to be accepted as a partner with Change for Kids Data from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: 97% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. 100% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. 98% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. 99% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 91% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. School’s needs: (School Quality Guide 2017-2018) 82% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 2018-19 CEP 39  86% of families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that their school offers a wide variety of activities and services (including related services and assistive and adaptive technologies where appropriate) to help improve life outcomes for their child. ● Increase student attendance ● Parent Participation at PTA meetings, Leadership team meetings, schoolwide events, etc. From feedback we've gathered from parents through informal surveys, the parents desire to have more workshops available to them around the curriculum and the common core standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with a continued emphasis on providing Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS), there will be a 2% increase in student daily attendance. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Workshops offered throughout the 2018-2019 school year: Parents/Students -monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers, Administration -Sept. - Nov./ January -monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) -December /March -monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) -bi-monthly (September 2018 - June 2019)  Common Core Learning Standards: o Literacy Inc o Raz Kids o Math Students with Disabilities-FBA,BIP, IEP planning School Safety Schoolwide PBIS  ELL orientation-introduction to ENL  One on One parent conferences  New York Public Library     P.S. 21’s school website: www.ps21statenisland.org  REMIND app: communication tool for families  Provide interpretation services for parents  Engage parents as active participants for cultural liaisons to the school community.  Host an International Dinner for all members of the P.S. 21 school community to share customs and traditions.  Title 1 Parent Involvement Events/Workshops: o My Hero and me o Provide parents with resources that enable them to make informed decisions about their child’s education o Share with parents and family members the high expectations that schools have established for the education of all ELLs and engaging them in the pursuit and achievement of those expectations.  o UAU afterschool program 2018-19 CEP 41 o NYCID afterschool program o Teachers sign up for "student check in" -monthly (September 2018 - June 2019) -Sept./Feb. -all school events (September 2018 - June 2019) -weekly (September 2018 - June 2019) -annually (September 2018 - June 2019) -weekly from Jan.- March 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SICPP- My Hero and Me Program   El Centro – Know Your Rights and immigration support  Project Hospitality- Mobile Pantry and Public Benefits Parents/ *My Hero & Me-8 consecutive weeks during April through May and Health Insurance assistance  NYC Department of Health- supports emotional health  Sanford Harmony-supports our students’ emotional growth  7 Habits/Leader in ME  Health Plus- offer parent workshops Students *September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration 2018-19 CEP 42  SIUH-support community health fairs   UFT- offer parent workshops  Public Library- offer parent workshops, Adult ESL classes  and free tutoring to our students LINC-offer parent workshops, assist with translation, providing reading programs for our students  Wagner College- support our students’ attendance  Port Richmond H.S.  Cookshop- supports and educates healthy eating    UAU-provide after school programs  NYCID- provide after school programs  Read Alliance-provide a reading program during after Shoprite Dietician S.I. Children’s Museum school I.S. 51   NYPD  Atlas Foundation  Council Woman Debbie Rose  Cookshop  PBIS parent team member or members  Provide parents with resources that enable them to  make informed decisions about their child’s education Share with parents and family members the high expectations that schools have established for the education of all ELLs and engaging them in the pursuit and achievement of those expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Ongoing partnership with Parent/Guardian to address areas of concerns ● Coordinate schedule with Key personnel to implement workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By June 2019, there will be a 2% attendance increase at the following events: - Student events - PTC & PTA attendance 2018-19 CEP 43  - Parent Workshop attendance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use parent attendance sheets and parent feedback exit slips to measure the success of progress. We will use student attendance to make choices for programming. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade level K-2 ELA, DRA Benchmarks 3-5-ELA Data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, Fundations, Schoolwide, Readers and Writers workshop, Orton Gillingham, Read Alliance Below Level on Math In Focus Unit tests,K-2 Math,3-5-Math Data,MathBenchmarks Robotics Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Push in and pull out small group tutoring School Day Small group 1:1 / Small group After-School Program (READ Alliance), After-School Tutoring Small group School Day 1:1 After-School (Robotics - 2x a week for an hour), Science Below Level on Unit tests Science Intervention Strategies Small group Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Below Level on Unit tests Referral by teachers or parents, repeated incidents Robotics Social Studies Intervention Strategies Counseling sessions, Sanford Harmony, PBIS 1:1 Small group 1:1 Small group 1:1 After-School Tutoring School Day, After-School (Robotics - 2x a week for an hour) School Day School Day, After-School Counseling, Homework Help 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. AIS, at-risk counseling, PBIS, Food Pantry (PRHS), attendance rewards system, family outreach, PBIS, conflict mediation including Operation respect We plan to meet with homeless families and inform them of the McKinney-Vento Act. We will disseminate McKinney-Vento posters in our school by the exits. Ensure that we arrange transportation (yellow bus or MetroCards in NYC to assist students with immediate enrollment. Follow up to see if families need assistance with locating: 1) school records, 2) medical records/immunizations; 3) proof of residency; 4) guardianship papers; 5) birth certificates or other documents normally needed. We will also provide priority placement for students if they need tutoring and/or related support services, free school lunch, Special Education, school supplies and Summer Programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All PS 21 teachers are highly qualified. We continue to specifically meet this goal by differentiating professional development offered to general education and special education teachers; content specialists and related service providers. Specific structures include but are not excluded to: ● Professional Development during Monday and Tuesday Professional Development time slots ● Unit Planning Grade Level Meetings - Classroom Teachers ● Grade Meetings ● Schoolwide, Math in Focus and FSC PD opportunities: ongoing throughout the year. ● Peer Intervisitations ● Feedback through walkthroughs and observations ● Annual survey for professional development opportunities. ● Assigned mentors for newly hired teachers ● Collaborate with Wagner College and CSI Education Departments to have student teachers and to identify promising teacher candidates. Recruitment strategies include hiring substitute teachers in order to verify their skills and suitability for teaching at PS 21. If suitable, their names are retained on file, in the event of a vacancy. Liaison with district colleagues to identify effective teachers who are searching for a new appointment. Unsolicited resumes are also kept on file and referred to when a vacancy occurs. Retention strategies include employing teachers who are on leave as F-status teachers, so that they can maintain contact with the school, and continue to develop their skills. At the end of the school year, a preference sheet is distributed. At this time teachers are welcome to apply for new positions. In addition they may share their requests for changes of position in order to further develop their skills. New positions are made known at 2018-19 CEP 48  this time and teachers are invited to apply for those, and also to state their requests for changes of position in order to further develop their skills. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). For the 2018-2019 school year, we have embedded professional development in many ways: ● For Literacy and Math, we have teacher teams who attend PD throughout the year and turnkey to staff during PD time slots ● For using the Danielson Framework to create a coherent set of beliefs, we plan to form a taskforce to extrapolate best practcies and expectations from the Danielson framework to disseminate to our school community. based upon feedback, the taskforce will create a formalized coherent set of beliefs in how PS 21 students learn best. ● PBIS: During the school year all staff is being trained in this initiative. ● Throughout the year, opportunities for professional development are offered to teachers focusing on all curriculum areas to meet all student needs especially students with disabilities and English Language Learners. ● Our teachers and staff have attended anti-bullying, crisis intervention and service learning workshops as they are offered by FSC and the DOE Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 CEP 49  It is our goal to provide a program that meets young children’s needs for health, safety, and guidance for social-emotional development as well as providing opportunities for developmentally appropriate learning. We have Fall and Spring meetings titled "Kindergarten Orientation." Our parent coordinator tours the building with the students to familiarize children with specific meeting areas, such as the auditorium, the cafeteria, the entrance and lobby. Parents are given information and materials aligned to the Common Core State Standards for kindergarten in letter/sound recognition, word work, reading, writing, math and the content areas The administrators meet the parents and children, they visit the Kindergarten classrooms. A home pack is provided for the summer vacation. Parents of the children are invited to enroll before the year begins and to advise school personnel if special services are required for their child. By proactively building relationships with our incoming families, preparations can be made in a timely manner to ensure a smooth transition into elementary school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in teacher teams to engage in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on positively impacting student learning. Teachers create time lines for summative and formative assessments. Professional development will be provided in how to analyze data to modify instruction and ultimately improve the overall academic achievement of our students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal 251,000 78,360 11,200 X X X 2018-19 CEP 50 Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, 5B, 5C. 5D. 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5C. 5D. 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5C. 5D. 5E  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,685 2,645,825 X X Sections 5A, 5B, 5C. 5D. 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5C. 5D. 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 51  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy School Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.21, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  T he school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: ● Providing Curriculum Conferences by grade ● Providing family math, literacy, and STEM days ● Providing a lending library to parents throughout the week. ● Offering parent workshops on retrieving online data for Interim assessments and State Tests 2018-19 CEP 53  ● Offering parent workshops on DRA assessments. ● Distributing math unit assessment letters with notes to parents on child’s progress ● Distributing periodic progress reports for students to inform parents of their academic performance  The school will provide opportunities for parents to get involved in their children’s education by participating in school events and educational trips that support the curriculum such as: ● Academics: Author Studies, Math Games, etc. ● PTA Meetings to include student of the month, holiday shows, Leader of the Month etc. ● Class Celebrations ● Class Trips ● Parent Information Fair ● Opening Ceremonies for the new school year ● Take Your Parent to School Day! ● Holiday Shows for all grades – drama and art celebrations ● Career Day ● 5th Grade Specialty Games ● Talent Show - Spring ● Carnival ● May Fete  The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to all parents in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and to the extent practical, in a language the parent can understand: ● School Website which contains a Parent Corner in several languages ● All school notices are provided in the child's home language ● Staff members are available to serve as translators in the office and during parent teacher conferences ● An after school class for non English speaking parents is available to parents to learn to speak English (Title III) and to understand school policies, procedures and homework hotline. 2018-19 CEP 54  ● Phone Master /REMIND – daily messages to provide updates on student homework, progress, etc. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible students consistent with Section 1118 – Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. ● In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency (LEP), parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This will include providing information and school reports required under Section 111 – State Plans of the ESSA is an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and to the extent practicable, in language parents understand. ● The school will involve all parents in decisions about how the Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. ● The school will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition of parental involvement: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities , including ensuring – ● that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; ● that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; ● that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; ● the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118-Parent Involvement of the ESSA. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 55   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. This School – Parent Compact is in effect during school year 2017 – 2018. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum School Responsibilities The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School will:      continue our instructional strategies including the 100-minute literacy block using Schoolwide Units of Study continue to use the workshop model during our daily instruction; continue the 100-minute math block using the curriculum from Math in Focus with supplementary resources from Go Math, iReady, and IXL; two science cluster teachers, (K-2) and (3-5) will provide more in-depth Science instruction; a media library cluster teacher will provide opportunities for students to use technology integrated with core subjects;  our arts program will provide enrichment classes such as visual and performing arts for all students;  continued provision of intense Academic Intervention Services to all students who are not meeting state standards;  employ three (3 )ENL teachers to provide mandated services to an increasing ELL population;  provide tailored and differentiated professional development for all staff;     continue to provide opportunities for teacher planning e.g., common preps, grade meetings, etc.; review DRA, standardized test scores, and other periodic assessments to identify at-risk students; conduct an Items skills analysis providing teachers with information for individualized instruction; send individual periodic progress reports to parents which will include helpful suggestions to assist student learning;  hold Curriculum Conferences in September to inform parents of the goals for all students in the grade;  celebrate Open School Week while providing all parents opportunities to visit their child’s classroom and observe teaching strategies, implementation of curriculum and child’s academic and social behavior;  our school library is also opened three periods a week as a lending library  for parents to become involved with reading to their child. Bilingual books sets are available for parents to borrow and use at home. 2018-19 CEP 56   Official Parent Teacher Conferences: Teachers will discuss student’s performance on interim assessments such as DRA and standardized test scores as well as class work, homework, behavior etc. The New York Public Library will be available to offer assistance to parents. schedule monthly Intervention and PPT meetings to discuss individual student behavior and achievement. Parents will be contacted to address their child’s needs;   I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School will:  provide parent with an opportunity to review student progress towards goals established throughout the year  hold Curriculum Conferences in September to inform parents of the goals for all students in the grade;  celebrate Open School Week while providing all parents opportunities to visit their child’s classroom and observe teaching strategies, implementation of curriculum and child’s academic and social behavior;  provide parent workshops, including topics such as data analysis which will provide an increase in parent awareness of child’s academic needs;  provide opportunities for parents to come into the classrooms and work with their child to become aware of curriculum and core standards  provide opportunities for parent to view curriculum exit projects  our school library is also opened three periods a week as a lending library  schedule monthly Intervention and PPT meetings to discuss individual student behavior and achievement. Parents will be contacted to address their child’s needs;  provide parent workshops, including topics such as data analysis which will provide an increase in parent awareness of child’s academic needs;  provide opportunities for parents to come into the classrooms and work with their child to become aware of curriculum and core standards  provide opportunities for parents to view and discuss curriculum exit projects  provide three report cards in child's home language;  encourage parents to participate on class trips and special classroom activities.  provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet;  provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children;  provide each parent timely notice when their child has assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulation (67 Fed. 71710, December 2, 2002)  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School -Parent Compact  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA;  hold a monthly meeting to inform parents of the school participation in Title I Part A programs, and to explain the Title I Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at monthly PTA meetings, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite all parents to this meeting. 2018-19 CEP 57  The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School will: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA;  hold a monthly meeting to inform parents of the school participation in Title I Part A programs, and to explain the Title I Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at monthly PTA meetings, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite all parents to this meeting. involve parents in the joint development of any school wide program plan, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way;   provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request of parents with disabilities, and to the extent practical, in a language that parents can understand;  provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet;  provide to parents an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in least English Language Arts and Mathematics; The Margaret P. Emery Elm Park School will: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  provide each parent timely notice when their child has assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulation (67 Fed. 71710, December 2, 2002)  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School -Parent Compact  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. support the utilization of services provided in collaboration with port Richmond Community High School  Parent Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We as parents will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  monitoring attendance including making sure my child’s is on time and prepared every day for school;   talking with my child about his/her school activities every day; scheduling daily homework time; 2018-19 CEP 58 volunteering in my child’s classroom;  providing an environment conducive for study;  making sure that homework is completed;   participating in the School Leadership Team and/or Parent-Teacher Association;  promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time;  participating in school activities on a regular basis;  staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate; reading together with my child every day;   providing my child with a library card;  communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility using "SPARK"; respecting the cultural differences of others;   express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for achievement. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: come to school ready to do our best and be the best; come to school with the necessary tools of learning- pens, pencils, books etc.; listen and follow directions;     participate in class discussions and activities;  be honest and respect the rights of others; follow the school’s/class rules of conduct;  follow the school’s dress code;  ask for help when we don’t understand;   do our homework every day and ask for help when we need to;      use the library to get information and to find books that we enjoy reading;  study for test and assignments; read at least 30 minutes every day outside school time; read at home with our parents; get adequate rest every night; give to our parents or to the adult who is responsible for our welfare, all notices and information we receive at school every day. 2018-19 CEP 59  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 21 will provide a Title III funded after school program for grades K-5 ELL students, which will meet for one hour sessions from 2:30-3:30pm on Tuesdays and Wednesdays on the following projected dates: November 27, 28, December 4, 5, 11, 12, 18, 19 2018 January 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, 23, 29, 30 February 6, 12, 13, 26, 27 March 5, 6, 2019. There are 12 total sessions for Cycle I and 11 sessions for Cycle II, totaling 24 sessions throughout the school year. The projected classes are scheduled as follows: Cycle I: Grades K, 1, 2(approximately 15 students per grade group) (12 total sessions) Tuesdays: November 27 December 4, 11, 18 2018 January 8, 15 2019 Wednesdays: November 28, December 5, 12, 19 2018 January 9, 16 2019 Cycle II: Grades 3, 4, 5(approximately 15 students per grade group) (11 total sessions) Tuesdays: January 22, 29 February 12, 26 March 5, 2019 Wednesdays: January 23, 30 February 6, 13, 27 March 6 2019 This Title III program will be broken up into two cycles. Students in grades K, 1, and 2 (Cycle I) will be participating from November through January in order to receive additional instruction and supports through the Title III program before spring assessments begin. Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 (Cycle II) will participate in the Title III program from January through March to target and strengthen skills to better prepare them for the upcoming transition to a new grade. The Title III program will target entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding proficiency levels across the elementary grades that are in need of academic English language development. Classes will be provided in English with ENL strategic instruction incorporated in all lessons, such as, graphic organizers, picture cards, vocabulary cards, sentence frames, guided reading instruction, dictionary skills, partner work, and peer discussion. Teachers will provide support through modeling, explicit instruction, and small group instruction focusing on writing conferences. The program will address all four modalities of language development (listening, speaking, reading and writing), with a priority focus on writing, as determined by the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data. The teaching staff for the Title III program will include three certified ENL teachers, Karla Espinoza, Jenna Hales, and Islam Elslawy. All students will receive instruction from an ENL teacher in the Title III program. The student to teacher ratio will be 15:1 for each group in each cycle. The program that will be used to provide this supplementary instruction in the Title III program is the Language Power program published by Teacher Created Materials. This program was carefully selected because it is designed to target students across all proficiency levels. It is designed to simultaneously prepare students to develop their English language skills across the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing, as well as support their content language structure and vocabulary development in alignment with the Common Core Standards. The program is thematic-based, including various non-fictional and fictional topics. Teachers will demonstrate how language and literacy work- what it looks and sounds like- to read and make meaning from text. Teachers will facilitate comprehensible input by 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information giving students many opportunities to see, hear, and interact with vocabulary utilizing the Language Power program. In addition, during the Title III program students will have access to bilingual books from the school library, as well as home language support from the National Geographic science library bilingual books. We also purchased Units of Study from Schoolwide, Inc for Grades K and 1 with a focus on nonfiction texts with science content. We will incorporate various hands-on activities that will be selected from our own community in the Title III program. The exposure of non-fiction text has motivated students to express their interest in learning more about animals. The Title III program will provide students with a real-world opportunity to learn and explore more about animals with the Staten Island Zoo. The Staten Island Zoo (instructor Kerry Gallagher) will be visiting on December 19, 2018 for Cycle I students, and February 22, 2019 for Cycle II students. This opportunity will help to strengthen students' academic language. The arts will also be incorporated into the Title III program. Mrs. Bonanno, the drama instructor, will be collaborating with the ENL teachers involved in the Title III program. She will bring her area of expertise to the Title III program by fostering role-playing, expressive language, public speaking, conversation, intonations, turn-taking, characterization, understanding dialogue, etc. through the use of literature and bringing literature to life on the stage. This will will foster accountable talk, which will include sequential, and descriptive language for continued success in language acquisition, specifically in the areas of speaking and listening. Let's Monet (instructor Leah Zara-Acevedo) will provide opportunities for students to create paintings on canvas using professional supplies. Participating in this experience will create another opportunity for students to have a discipline-based discussion. Let's Monet will be visiting on January 9, 2019 for Cycle I, and March 6, 2019 for Cycle II students. This program will be included to link real-world experiences with more in-depth knowledge and application of language and vocabulary development. Another opportunity that students will be involved in are hands on Science experiments led by "What Matters for Kids" education for kids company. Students will be able to explore various types of science topics and be a part of hands on experiments and new learning opportunities through the Science world. The scientist will be expected to come on January 16, 2019 for Cycle I students, and on January 23, 2019 for Cycle II students. Another language resource Title III will be purchasing and utilizing is the Raz Plus program, including the ELL component. This program was chosen to target Tier I and Tier II vocabulary development, as well as build basic and social vocabulary for the entering and emerging students. Raz Plus will provide the Title III program with a wider variety of literature in different content based and thematic based areas on the students' varied reading levels. Raz Plus also provides students with access to bilingual books. Students will have opportunities to listen to the literature, read the literature, and record themselves reading the literature in the Raz Plus program. Including Raz Plus in the Title III program also allows for students to interact with and utilize technology, as some students may not have access at home. For students that do have access to technology at home, the Raz Plus program can be accessed at home and students can connect what they are learning in the Title III program to their home life and continue working at their own pace from home. Students will also have an opportunity to show their leadership skills through Google Classroom. As a culminating activity, at the end of each cycle, the students participating in the Title III program will have an opportunity to work together in groups to create a replication and expression of a piece of the program that resonated with them. They will have the opportunity to make a piece of a quilt, make a tri-fold pamphlet, create a poster, create a 3D model, or represent their experience in an original form. The supplies for this project will be provided by the Title III funding, and students will have an opportunity to share their group projects with one another. Parents will be notified in their preferred home language about their child's opportunity to participate in the Title III program. Notices about the information and the dates of the program, as well as permission slips for their children to participate will be sent home in the parents' 2018-19 CEP 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information preferred home language. This information will also be posted on the school website and sent via the Remind App in the parent's preferred home language. The permission slips, copies of notices sent home, and attendance records for students participating in the Title III program will be kept on file in a locked filing cabinet in the main office. The approximate cost of this program is $7, 420 for direct instruction and $2,474 for materials. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To keep in alignment with Chancellor Caranza's outlook that "all teachers are teachers of ELLs", and the fact that almost every classroom at P.S. 21 contains ELL students, P.S. 21's Title III Program for professional development of teachers has been designed to include all staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. The schedule for these professional development sessions is during the time allotted by the teachers' contract on Mondays from 2:30pm-3:50pm. The teachers participating in the Title III program, as well as those that are interested in receiving additional support and professional development in working with ELLs, including new teachers at P.S. 21 that need to fulfill their ELL Professional Development requirement for the state, will be included on a rotating basis in this program. This professional development plan will begin in September and continue through June on the following dates: September 17, 24 October 1, 15, 22, 29 November 5, 19, 26, December 3, 10, 17 2018 January 7, 14, 28 2019 February 4, 11, 25 March 4, 11, 18, 25 April 1, 8, 15, 29 May 6, 13, 20 June 3, 10, 17, 24. The topics to be covered during this on-going professional development program including the teacher of the Title III program are as follows: Introduction to ENL, Looking at the ELL data for the students of P.S. 21, Discussion of new vocabulary terms for ELLs, Introduction to format and expectations of the NYSESLAT, Discussion of new Common Core Language Progressions for ELLs, Strategies for connecting content and language in reading and writing, Strategies for connecting content and language in math. The teachers of ELLs, including the teachers participating in the Title III program, will have access to resources made available by the Office of English Language Learners, including a video library. Some of the topics include, teaching vocabulary to English Language Learners, and challenges and opportunities in the English Language Arts Common Core Standards. Additional resources provided by the Office of English Language Learners are units and lesson plans which provide scaffolding supports designed to ensure that all ELLs can access text. These topics will be covered on a rotating session basis as the teachers of P.S. 21, including the teachers participating in the Title III program, are rotated through the professional development program throughout the year. Each session will be devoted to one topic. The goal of this 2018-19 CEP 63  Part C: Professional Development program is to have all teachers that work with ELLs, including the teachers participating in the Title III program, gain a better understanding of language development and how to incorporate language supports and strategies into their everyday lessons. Participating in these professional development activities will positively impact the progress of ELLs by providing teachers implementing the Titile III program with additional strategies and instructional knowledge. The certified ENL teachers of P.S. 21, Karla Espinoza, Jenna Hales, and Islam Elslawy will be sharing their knowledge and expertise as the providers of this professional development program at P.S. 21. Records of attendance and agendas from the professional development sessions will be kept on file in the Main office as well as the ENL office. Once the Professional Development calendar for Staten Island Field Support Center & DELLS is finalized, we will be attending the PDs that will be provided. The approximate projected cost of this program is $1,237 for the supplemental materials. No staff members or teachers from P.S. 21 or other outside professionals will be paid per session to run this program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III program will include various opportunities for parents to actively participate in order to promote higher achievement in students. Parents will be invited to participate alongside their child on the special events. The parents will be able to observe, participate, and create discussion around various animals presented by the Staten Island Zoo on December 2018, and February 27, 2019. They will also be able to engage in the arts through Let's Monet on January 9, 2019, and March 6, 2019. Parents will assist their child in planning and designing their masterpieces. Parents will promote further discussion and create connections between the school and their child. The Scientist will be visiting P.S.21 on January 16, 2019, and January 23, 2019. In addition, parents will have the opportunity to volunteer to read a book to their child's Title III class after school. They may choose a book in their preferred home language or English. Their child may read the same book to the Title III class after school in either their preferred home language or English. The parents will coordinate with the Title III teachers for the best times and dates for this opportunity. The parent's participation and interest in school activities will foster academic conversations at home. This partnership will foster increased achievement in the classroom and on the NYSESLAT. Research shows that students' whose parents are involved in school activities perform better in the classroom and on standardized tests. The Title III program will also include an after school Parental Support Workshop/ Homework Help component provided by certified ENL teachers from the P.S. 21 staff, Karla Espinoza, Jenna Hales, and Islam Elslawy, as well as by the parent coordinator, Jennifer Manik. Translations will be provided as needed in the parent's preferred language. Topics addressed will be homework help, school policies and procedures, navigating the school website, important 2018-19 CEP 64  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities state testing information and utilizing technology to access assessment tools and data. An orientation meeting for the Title III program will introduce parents to the program as well as address any parent requests and concerns. This information will help to guide the topics and interests addressed in the parent workshop, and topics may be added or adjusted according to parent needs, interests and concerns. This workshop will increase parental awareness of school activities and places to obtain support for the curriculum. This parent-school partnership will support ELL students’ efforts to achieve high levels performance in the classroom and on state assessments, including the NYSESLAT. All information will be distributed in the parent’s home language. The topics for these parental workshops are chosen based on the yearly parent survey distributed and analyzed by the parent coordinator, Jennifer Manik. This opportunity will provide parents with technological support and they will be exposed to the various school applications utilized by the teachers that will contribute to student achievement. The topics planned for these technology-specific workshops are How to Navigate the New P.S. 21 website, How to Access Your Child's Google Classroom Account, Features and Applications of Google Translate, Introduction to Raz-Kids, and Introduction to iXL. These workshops will be run by P.S. 21's Technology Leadership Team, Patricia Wong, Valerie Nobile, and Dominic Mascara. This information will be translated into the parent's home language and all printed materials available at the workshop will be provided in the parent's home language. The parents whose children are involved in the Title III program will be included in these workshops. Parents, including parents whose children are involved in the Title III program, will be provided with an informative invitation that lists the dates and times of the workshop in advance, so they can make arrangements to attend. This information will be provided in the parents' preferred language. This information will be posted on the school website, as well as made available to the parents via the Remind app in their preferred home language. The parents will have the opportunity to attend these sessions during the Parent Communication time set aside in the teachers' contract. The sessions will be held on Tuesdays from 2:30-3:05pm on the following dates: September 18, 25 October 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 November 6, 13, 20, December 4, 11, 18, January 8, 15, 22, 29 February 12, 26, March 5, 12, 19, 26 April 2, 9, 16, 30 May 7, 14, 21, 28 June 18, 25 2019. All records of attendance and participation, including agendas of parental workshops, will be kept in a locked file cabinet in the main office. The approximate cost to run this program is $1, 237 for supplementary materials. Included in this amount will be $250 that will be spent on snacks and beverages for parents. No teachers or staff members from P.S. 21 will be paid per session for this program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 2018-19 CEP 65 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Margaret P. Emery School Borough Staten Island School Number 021 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Anthony Cosentino Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Karla Espinoza Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Jenna Hales/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Islam Elslawy/ENL Related-Service Provider Superintendent Mr. Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Ms. Allison Graham Coach School Counselor Mr. Charles Fernando Parent Rosa DeJesus Parent Coordinator Ms. Jennifer Manik Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Enrico M. Domingo Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 353 2018-19 CEP 67 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.13%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The LAP is periodically revisited and revised as the school year progresses and the population of our school continuously changes. It is shared with all staff members so that they are all aware of its contents, as well as to promote the sense that every member of the P.S. 21 community is a vital part of serving and educating our ENL students. Included in the variety of formative assessment tools used to provide data on the proficiency of ELL students at P.S. 21 across the content areas are the Diagnostic Reading Assessment (DRA), Benchmark Exams (ELA and Math), EdPerformance (Math), classroom unit pre-assessments (Math and ELA), classroom performance tasks as part of the program Schoolwide Curriculum (ELA), and classroom unit tests (Math). These different assessments are utilized by the teachers to determine literacy levels, math skills strengths and weaknesses, etc. For example, the DRA data shows that our ELL population generally scores below grade level benchmarks. The teachers use this information to create their flexible reading groups to foster reading strategies to increase the students' literacy skills. In addition, best practices utilized by the teachers at P.S. 21 to provide constant 2018-19 CEP 68  formative assessment in every day classroom routines are teacher-created success criteria (for self-assessment), teacher-created rubrics (for self-, peer-, and teacher), teacher-created exit tickets, and discussion techniques. The teachers use the information gathered from these assessments daily to adjust the lessons in each content area to meet students' needs. Teachers also collect student work throughout the entire school year to create a formative portfolio that will be passed on to their next year's teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There are several structures in place at P.S. 21 to support the effort of data-driven instruction based on formative assessments. One of the structures in place is the participation of all teachers in grade-level Inquiry Teams. The Inquiry Teams analyze student work and formative assessments each week from each classroom. The Inquiry Teams use this information to revise curriculum and individualize lessons for students. The ENL teachers participate in grade-level Inquiry Team meetings and provide examples of work completed by their students and offer suggestions for curriculum development with ENL strategies. ENL teachers also meet weekly with grade-level teachers during common planning periods to co-plan curriculum and discuss student progress. The school leadership at P.S. 21 supports this structure by allowing for the flexibility in scheduling to allow for teachers to have the time to participate in these important meetings. Another structure in place is the professional developments provided at P.S. 21 to help teachers learn about and implement different classroom formative assessment structures in the classroom, such as success criteria and rubrics. These professional developments are provided by teams of teachers on Core Collaborative Reading and Core Collaborative Math. The school leadership supports this structure by reviewing and sharing data with the staff during professional developments, grade meetings, and individual meetings with teachers. Another structure in place is a professional development planned by the Data Specialist at P.S. 21 to share the information and provide assistance analyzing data provided by the formative assessments. The Data Specialist also provides information and direction about how to navigate schoolnet to see what standards each individual child needs to work on in both Math and ELA. From this information, teachers can create their own formative assessments to be utilized in the classroom. The school leadership supports this structure by having created the Data Specialist position to make data and its use and accessibility in the classroom a priority at P.S. 21. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 21 uses several baseline assessments to provide for students and their various areas of need. Student work and participation is continuously analyzed. ENL teachers share common prep time and meet with classroom teachers on a weekly basis. ENL teachers and classroom teachers analyze students' test scores from the Benchmark Exams on schoolnet for Math and ELA, EdPerformance for Math, and the ELL Interim Assessment. Based on their strengths and weakness, students are grouped based on their proficiency levels. This allows for discussion of individual student progress and collaboration to plan. ENL Teachers also analyze DRA scores along with the breakdown of our students' scores on the different modalities of the NYSESLAT from the prior spring to use as a baseline for the upcoming school year. We examine the NYSESLAT data closely to see if progress was made in a growth proficiency, or in one or more modalities. We find this information by looking at each child's testing history in ATS to see the individual breakdown of their score in the four different modalities. Utilizing this current data from these assessments, we see that the most challenging modality and area of need for the vast majority of our ELLs is the writing modality. We cross reference their performance with the NYSESLAT cut scores to determine proficiency in each modality. This allows us to see what areas each child needs to work on individually. The ENL teachers look at the overall general performance and data trends of the NYSESLAT to reflect upon the current structure on the ENL program. The NYSITELL is utilized as an English Language proficiency baseline for eligible students new to New York State. In reviewing the NYSITELL, we find that the data assists us in determining the grouping of our ELLs. We group our incoming ELLs according to grade-level and proficiency level. This allows us to work on content area grade-appropriate skills in conjunction with English Language development across the modalities. In addition, our NYSITELL data reveals that after testing 10 eligible students, 10% of students were not entitled to ENL services. Students that qualified to receive ENL services scored at all proficiency levels: 1 student scored at the Entering level, 1 student scored at the Emerging level, 4 students scored at the transitioning level, and 3 students scored at the Expanding level. The trend is that there are more students entering the first year at P.S. 21 with some prior English exposure as opposed to previous years in the recent past. This collective data is reviewed and suggestions are made for changes in scheduling, grouping, and materials used to foster progress at a greater rate. 2018-19 CEP 69  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? One structure in place at P.S. 21 to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered is to analyze the data in grade-level teams to see which students are meeting grade-level benchmarks. P.S 21's reading curriculum, Schoolwide, was chosen because the structure of the program is very flexible and allows for teachers to tailor the curriculum. Schoolwide also has a lot of lessons that teachers can chose from, as well as other supplemental materials, when providing intervention in their classroom in the form of guided reading. If a child is not meeting the benchmark in grade 2 or 3, there is an Academic Intervention Literacy Specialist that will begin providing targeted instruction based on the child's individual needs. In addition, children that are in grade 2 and 5 may be paired up through a literacy program LINC in order to foster the love of reading and to continue to increase literacy skills. Interventions in the classroom provided throughout all grades are a math coach that comes in to reduce class size and target students struggling with certain math standards and math fluency. In the testing grades (grades 3-5) an additional reading specialist comes in to focus on test-taking strategies and further reduce class size, therefore, students can feel better equipped to tackle the state exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELL students are referred to RTI in response to universal screening and their response to strong core (Tier 1) instruction. Some other factors, specific to ELL students, that are taken into consideration are the number of years of instruction previously received in an ENL (or bilingual from another school) program, English and home language literacy, student achievement and progress on the NYSESLAT, ENL or classroom teacher recommendation, parent or guardian request, and samples of student work and/or home language. Our school uses data to drive instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework for grades K-5 by closely monitoring progress. The classroom and ENL teachers decide who will be given Tier II and Tier III (if necessary) instruction based upon Tier I response and performance on data such as classroom observation, teacher conferencing, student work, classroom assessments, and more formal assessments, such as previous performance on the state exams, including the NYSESLAT. If a child is being considered for RtI many factors are taken into consideration. An additional factor to consider when thinking about including an ELL in RtI is whether the student has inconsistent Interrupted formal education (SIFE), familiarity with and exposure to English, the degree of proficiency in English and the native language, and whether they've had exposure to learning opportunities, and prior school experiences. Once a child is identified as being in need of RtI, that child is given specific RtI instruction in small group (Tier II) and then is closely monitored to see if they continue to need RtI, if they need more intensive RtI (Tier III), or if they are no longer in need of RtI and can continue to receive differentiated Tier I instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In reviewing the data provided in the EDAT and the RLAT report, we find that the pattern of student performance across all grade levels on the NYSESLAT is that the students in general score higher in the reading and speaking modalities, than in the listening and writing modalities. In reviewing the NYSITELL, we find that the data assists us in determining the grouping of our ELLs. The pattern across student performance on the NYSESLAT reveals that the vast majority of students are struggling in the writing modality. This clarifies the focus of our ENL instruction. The staff meets weekly through Inquiry Team, according to grade, and during Instructional Team, across all grade levels, in order to identify and discuss areas of need of the students based on the NYSESLAT modalities and the Targets of Measure to and adjust the curriculum and classroom instruction accordingly. In addition, after analyzing the NYSESLAT data more closely we noticed that as students progress in their overall proficiency levels, the writing component is not showing the same rate of growth as the other strands. This is preventing the ELL students from achieving commanding status. In looking at the ELA data from the 2017 exam, the ELLs in grade 3 scored an overall average proficiency level of 14.3. The ELLs in grade 4 scored an overall proficiency level of 22.2. The ELLs in grade 5 scored an overall proficiency level of 5.3. This is consistent with the data from the NYSESLAT, because the grade 3 exam includes a lot of writing. If ELLs are struggling in the 2018-19 CEP 70  writing component on the NYSESLAT, this will also translate into their performance on the ELA exam. In looking at the Math data from the 2017 exam, the ELLs in grade 3 scored an overall average proficiency level of 14.3. The ELLs in grade 4 scored an overall proficiency level of 5.3. The ELLs in grade 5 scored an overall proficiency level 5.6. This is consistent with the data from the NYSESLAT, as there is more reading and writing on the current NYS Math exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? One structure that is in place at P.S.21 to disseminate these findings in order to make school-wide adjustments to our programs is the utilization of the weekly co-planning time and inquiry team meetings between the ENL teachers and grade-level teachers. When the ENL teachers analyze the data and come across trends and findings, these are shared with the classroom teachers. Another structure in place is the professional developments provided at P.S.21 in the reading and processing of data through the use of RLAT and the EDAT. The information provided by the RLAT is given to and explained to the staff. In addition, the staff is provided with training in how the EDAT is used and the wealth of information it provides all in one tool. Inquiry teams use the information provided by these reports and tools to choose a grade-level focus based on the standards and student performance. These reports and tools also provide an opportunity to brainstorm techniques and strategies to move students, have structured conversations based on data, and to foster student progress. Another structure in place is the teacher team meetings with content area coach specialists in order to develop and refine curriculum. ENL teachers attend and participate in these meetings to learn from the coaches (Math and ELA) and provide their expertise in ENL strategies. These curriculum refinements are made based on the data collected and suggestions made by the coaches. These coaching sessions take place throughout the school year. School leadership supports these structures by creating the room and flexibility in the scheduling to allow for teachers to meet and participate in these important meetings. School leadership also sits in on Inquriy Team meetings to provide additional support, answer any questions, and provide guidance. School leadership also supports the professional development structure by listening to teacher feedback on what aspects of data need clarification, and by setting aside time for the information to be disseminated. School leadership also supports the professional development of the ENL teachers by releasing them to attend important ELL Data meetings run by the Field Support Center. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL Push-In Services are provided for integrated ENL instruction by an ENL certified teacher. Instruction is provided in English using ENL methodologies and scaffolding techniques. Students are heterogeneously grouped by grade level with mixed proficiency levels within each group. Students are provided ENL support in both ENL/ELA and a content area. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher co-plan in order to deliver standards-based grade-level differentiated curriculum and support to the ELL students in the integrated classroom. Stand alone ENL is provided by an ENL certified teacher. These services are provided using homogeneous grouping by grade and proficiency level (Entering/Emerging). The ENL teachers schedules are aligned with the classroom teachers in order to provide maximum support for content areas, such as ELA and Math. The ENL teachers make sure to co-plan with the classroom teacher in order to make sure that the stand-alone ENL services provided, will support the classroom teacher's instruction, so students are not missing out on grade-level instruction while participating in the stand-alone program. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S.21 does not offer a TBE program at this time. 2018-19 CEP 71  c. DL program. If applicable. P.S.21 does not offer a DL program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers look at the RLAT for the breakdown of the modalities and the overall performance level of each ELL on the NYSESLAT. This will ensure that each ELL receives the correct amount of mandated minutes of instructional services. Once the number of minutes of required services has been identified, these ELLs' minutes are scheduled within STARS to ensure compliance. Entering and Emerging students receive 8 periods per week (50 mins. per period) of instructional mandated minutes by a licensed ENL teacher. The Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of ENL stand alone instruction and the other 180 minutes will be integrated ELA instruction. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 4 periods per week (50 minutes per period) of ENL/ELA and ENL support in a content area. The Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and ENL support in a content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in the ENL model in English. This model delivers instruction through grade-level, heterogeneous proficiency groups. The instructional approach to this model is for the students to gain language proficiency and acquire content area skills simultaneously. This is done through the collaboration of the ENL teachers and content area classroom teachers. Both ENL and content area teachers utilize ENL strategies and scaffolds to support ELLs in the classroom. A major focus is to foster discussion through Socratic seminars and accountable talk. Students engage in discussion and form thought-provoking questions. This develops their listening and speaking skills and also provides a bridge to support their writing. The use of visual, auditory, technological and tactile methods are used to make content comprehensible to help students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S.21 is focused on implementing best classroom practices, such as the use of learning targets, success criteria, protocols, self and peer assessments and rubrics. The ENL teachers implement these practices in their lessons as well. ENL teachers also work and plan with the grade-level teachers to implement integrated co-teaching when the students' proficiency level mandate allows for content area ENL services. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Entering ELLs are evaluated in their home language throughout the year utilizing a variety of assessments, including Math benchmarks, Ed Performance (Math), and Science. Teachers can get translated versions of classroom assessments and Math unit assessments are provides in the native language. Paraprofessionals are available to translate or to read directions when needed. Writing samples are written and assessed in the home language for new comers. The data for the home language assessments has shown that when student initially come in to the school, the home language assessments provide a great access point for them to show what they know. As time progresses, and they are given more explicit instruction in English, the preference for these home language assessments begins to drop off and the students begin to prefer the English assessments. Rubrics for self-assessment and teacher assessment are translated into the home language for student use. Exit tickets are also translated for student use. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are provided with supplemental exposure to skills that they may have missed throughout their previous formal education. These students are also paired up with, when possible, a student at P.S. 21 that has a similar cultural background and speaks the same home language. This will help them to transition to American life and the school culture at 2018-19 CEP 72  P.S. 21. Native language support is provided when available and necessary. SIFE students are also provided with picture cards, and bilingual glossaries to assist them with grade-level content and foster skills and language acquisition. SIFE students are provided with extra small-group, or individualized support to help them gain and practice foundational literacy and math skills as part of their differentiated instruction. They also receive intensive vocabulary work and guided practice with foundational skills they may be missing at any point. This will help bring them up to grade-level at a more rigorous pace. ENL teacher modify their lesson plans when accounting for a SIFE student in order to best accommodate their learning. When identifying and learning more about potential SIFE students, the ENL teachers at P.S. 21 utilized the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and Guidance documents available on the NYSED website. These tools help us to create a more clear picture of the student and his or her educational background before coming to P.S. 21. Utilizing the SIFE identification flow chart helps us to see who may or may not be a potential SIFE when new students are entering P.S. 21. In addition, if a student is identified as SIFE, then the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener and Writing Screener give us a starting point to begin to formulate an instructional plan for this student in regard to literacy skills. b. Newcomer students are provided specialized differentiated instruction to help them develop English Language skills and to adapt to school life at P.S. 21. These students are provided with a lot of picture support, vocabulary instruction, and language structure scaffolding, as well as paired with peers that are more proficient in English. These students also have access to the use of technology, specifically through the use of academic website RAZ-kids. This website provides grade-level books in both English and Spanish. Teachers utilize descriptive feedback and success criteria to help newcomers become familiar with and have an access point to high expectations for grade-level work. c. Instruction for P.S. 21's developing students is designed with an integrated philosophy of curriculum. The lessons are differentiated according to the student's proficiency levels across the different modalities. The goal of these lessons is for the students to gain language proficiency skills and acquire content area skills simultaneously. This is done through collaboration of the ENL and content area teachers. d. The Long Term ELLs at P.S. 21 are given intensive language structure support, especially in reading and writing. They are given extra vocabulary support in the content areas to help them succeed. The Long Term ELLs are given small group instruction in order to target their specific needs more effectively. The former ELLs are also invited to participate in the Title III after school program provided at P.S.21. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status are also given specialized instruction. If these Former ELLs are in grades 2 or 3, and they are still seen as struggling readers, they are given intensive reading intervention by the Reading Intervention Specialist at P.S. 21. These students are also entitled to 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL so that they continue to receive higher-level language support and the opportunity to develop language skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Presently P.S 21 offers an extensive ENL program including small group instruction for ELL-SWDs as well as bilingual libraries in all classrooms for use by ELL-SWDs. We also offer an intensive after school workshop program for our struggling ELLs, including ELL-SWDs, who are deficient in their writing skills using the Language Power materials. This after school program is supplemented with the Language Power materials, as well as StoryWorks, and StoryWorks Jr. by Scholastic. The materials utilized by the ENL teachers also include National Geographic kids books, RAZ-kids materials, and the guided reading materials provided by Schoolwide to target the needs of ELL-SWD. In addition, there is a special education teacher that provides small-group support to ELL-SWDs in grades 3-5 to help them adjust to the academic demands of the upper-elementary grades. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At our school ELL-SWDs are integrated into the ENL program to simultaneously achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. This is done through collaboration of the ENL and Special Education teacher. The ENL, Special Education, and classroom (if the child is in an ICT setting) teachers co-plan grade-level, standards-based curriculum for all ELL-SWDs. While planning, all of the teachers involved keep in mind the individual goals of each child according to their IEPs. ENL teachers have access to the students' IEPs on SESIS in order to modify lessons based on the student's goals. Teachers keep in mind scheduling flexibility in order to group the students in the best way possible to maintain consistency with their IEP goals and needs, including language goals and needs, all within the least restrictive 2018-19 CEP 73  environment. The opportunity for any additional support, special programs, or events that are offered to ELLs include ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs are provided with targeted small group instruction in content areas. In ELA students are provided with guided reading instruction, Fundations for phonics support, and the academic website RAZ-Kids to instruct with targeted intervention. In Math, students have access to Go Math to support the curriculum and supplemental materials in Spanish. Students also have access to the academic website iXL. This provides standards-based targeted instruction to provide students with the practice in different forms of math problems and to increase mathematical fluency. All classrooms are equipped with a SmartBoard in order to give all children the chance to experience technology enhanced lessons. Teachers can also utilize lap tops and iPads to integrate technology into the classroom. These services and interventions are provided to all ELL subgroups as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? An improvement to the current ENL program will be the ENL teachers providing intensive ENL language instruction to Entering and Emerging ELLs to reflect the changes in the mandates according to CR Part 154. These ELLs will be provided with 180 mins. of stand alone ENL and 180 of integrated ENL. In addition, the ENL Teachers will strengthen the existing program by working and co-planning with the grade-level teachers in order to implement the content area integrated co-teaching model. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time none of our programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs at P.S. 21. This year the Title III After School program will be available to all ELL students in grades K-5, including Former ELLs. This program will include intensive language enrichment through the use of the Language Power Program. ELLs will have the opportunity to participate in an arts enriched program as well have the opportunity to experience a traveling zoo and also to work with a scientist to experience a STEAM program. These experiences provide excellent opportunities for the ELLs at P.S. 21 to practice using academic language. All of these opportunities are expanded upon with literacy activities before and after. ELLs at P.S. 21 in grades 3-5 have the opportunity to be involved in an After School Test Prep program that focuses in on strategies in the test-taking genre to give students extra practice before the state exam. ELLs also have the opportunity to participate in the After School Program Read Alliance where they will work in small groups with students from the community high school on homework and literacy skills. ELLs can also attend UAU, which is an After School Program that provides students with homework help, as well as with opportunities to try new experiences, such as crocheting, cooking, origami, art, and exploring science projects. P.S. 21 also provides After School opportunities for the arts such as the Music after school program to work with the music teacher and drama to work on the school play with the school drama teacher. ELLs have the opportunity to participate in all of these activities. All ELLs are invited to participate in these programs through invitations and permission slips sent home in both English and their preferred home language. This keeps parents informed and included as well. In addition, all teachers and After School programs utilize the Remind app in order to send parents notifications instantly. These messages are translated into the parent's preferred home language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs at P.S. 21 have access to a variety of instructional materials including various opportunities to use technology. For ELA instruction and support P.S. 21 provides resources from Fundations, Schoolwide, RAZ-Kids, National Geographic kids books, StoryTown leveled readers and a library of various genres of guided reading books, specific to the ENL department. Classroom libraries provide a wide variety of genres, levels, and topics of interest for students to choose from. Students have access to bilingual books in the classroom as well as in the school media center. For Math instruction and support P.S. 21 provides resources from HSP Math, GO Math, and iXL (an online resource). Students have access to bilingual materials in math, 2018-19 CEP 74  including assessments. P.S. 21 students, including ELLs utilize technology in the form of laptops, iPads, and SmartBoards. ELLs have the opportunity to work with our media center specialist and become part of P.S. 21's TechSquad to further their interest and talent for technology. This technology is integrated across all content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language is supported through our ENL program. The ELL students are supplied with bilingual math glossaries. They are also provided with translated tests through the computer, eg: Ed Performance and classroom math assessments. ELL students have access to bilingual books in the classroom libraries as well as in our school media center. The online academic website, RAZ-Kids also provides students with access to bilingual books. This resource also features a tool for the students to have the books read to them in their native language. Partnerships with Spanish-speaking peers are created in the classroom to ease transition. ENL Spanish-speaking teachers and paraprofessionals also provide language support. If a student is a newcomer, rubrics for self-assessment and teacher assessment are translated into the students' home language. A newcomer is also offered the option to write written responses or writing samples in their home language for teacher assessment. A rubric translated into their home language is provided for assessment. Exit tickets are translated for student use as well, if needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In an effort to maximize the English language acquisition of our ELLs, The ENL teachers have a common planning period where they share instructional best practices. Entering and Emerging students receive 8 periods (50 minutes each) of their mandated minutes. This ensures that students not only receive but exceed the required 360 minutes. These students are grouped according to grade-level and age appropriateness, as well as throughout the rest of the instructional day. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 4 periods (50 minutes each) to ensure that they not only receive but exceed their required service minutes. These students are grouped according to grade-level and age appropriateness during all ENL instructional periods, as well as throughout the rest of the instructional day. The ENL teachers provide high quality instruction using scaffolding techniques with age/ grade level appropriate materials, including the use of technology such as iPads, laptops and SmartBoards. ENL teachers meet with grade-level teachers to co-plan instruction (whether the instruction is being delivered in the integrated or stand-alone model) in order to insure that ELLs are receiving grade-level standards-based instruction. The ENL teachers are working on language acquisition and content area skills simultaneously. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At this time P.S. 21 is not a co-location. The programs, resources and services available to P.S. 21 are utilized solely at P.S. 21 staff and students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As a newly enrolled ELL is registered at P.S. 21, as well as at the end of each school year, each student receives a homework packet and a summer reading list from the classroom teachers for the grade they are entering. Students complete a reading response journal prior to returning to school. The newly enrolled ELL students are given an opportunity to participate in the Title III Summer Enrichment Program at a local school site. The newly enrolled ELLs will also have the opportunity to participate in the Summer Camp Program at P.S. 21., run by staff members at P.S. 21. The ELLs are invited to participate in either of these programs via notifications and permission slips sent home in their native language. This allows the ELL student to have a successful transition into the coming school year. Prior to the beginning of the school year, parents and newly enrolled ELLs of all grade levels are invited to take a tour of the school with school leadership, the parent coordinator, and the ENL teachers. The parents and newly enrolled kindergarten ELLs are also invited to a kindergarten-specific orientation where parents and students are able to observe a kindergarten classroom and the end of the school year prior to the September that they will be officially enrolled. They meet the kindergarten teachers and take a tour of the school. The parent coordinator provides a list of helpful topics that will be covered during the kindergarten school year, as well as what their child should be expected to know and do as they enter kindergarten. The parent coordinator will also provide helpful tips to aid in the transition to school. The information communicated will be provided in their native language as well as English. If an ELL enrolls during the school year, the child and parent are met and interviewed by the ENL teachers in their native language and 2018-19 CEP 75  English. The child will be paired with a peer in their classroom that shares their home language, and, if possible, their native culture. The parent will be invited to the parent orientation and all other parent involvement activities offered at P.S. 21. The newly enrolled ELL and parents will also be offered support by the school counselor, parent coordinator, school leadership, and ENL teachers throughout the school year in case any issues or concerns arise. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered to ELLs or to any students at P.S. 21 at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time P.S. 21 does not offer a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at P.S. 21 includes all teachers. A professional development committee is formed to assess the needs and interest of the staff. This committee will seek out resources, speakers, and topics to be addressed during Monday After School professional development time. The committee will make sure to include ELL specific topics in alignment with CR-Part 154.2. All teachers are encouraged to participate in the professional development workshops provided by the Office of ELLs as they see workshops offered that pertain to their practice. Professional Development is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the common core learning standards in many forms. Professional Development may be offered through the workshops designed by the Office of ELLs throughout the school year. These opportunities may also be offered on ELL specific topics through Monday After School professional development time. The tentative calendar to provide professional learning to non-ELL teachers on ELL topics is: November 6, 2017, December 4, 2017, January 8, 2018, February 5, 2018, March 5, 2018 and April 2, 2018. In addition, the ENL team may turn key information they have learned at a district meeting or share professional articles and/or research based techniques with other staff members. At the beginning of the year, the ENL teachers will distribute and go over a folder filled with information on teaching techniques and expectations for each language acquisition level, as well as how to create a welcoming classroom environment to foster ELL participation during a professional development. The tentative date for this professional learning is October 16, 2017. The ENL teachers will share information about the difference between language acquisition and learning disabilities in a professional development workshop designed for the teachers at P.S. 21. The ENL Team at P.S. 21 will also design a professional development specifically for the paraprofessionals that work with ELLs. The tentative date for this professional learning is October 23, 2017. This professional development will help paraprofessionals to better understand language acquisition and what strategies and techniques they can use while working with and supporting the ELLs in the classroom. The ENL Team also provides access for all staff member to a professional literature library in their office. These books and articles provide research-based techniques and strategies for teachers and paraprofessionals to read and try out in their classrooms. Some titles in this library are Research-Based Strategies for English Language Learners by Rea & Mercuri, Content and Language by Mora-Flores, and A Language for Learning by Hyerle & Yeager. ENL teachers can also provide support in navigating online websites, such as Colorin Colorado, for teacher and paraprofessionals to utilize as a resource. ELL teachers are given the opportunity to participate in inter-visitations and Inquiry Teams to strengthen their practice as their ELL students engage in the common core learning process. In addition, ELL teachers are included in all of the professional learning opportunities that pertain to the school curriculum and 2018-19 CEP 76  school's educational initiatives. These opportunities include participating in Core Collaborative Math, Core Collaborative Reading, iXL, Schoolwide, schoolnet, as well as meeting with individual content coaching specialists. ELL teachers will also be attending workshops provided by the Staten Island Field Support Center, including topics of technology (September 27, 2017), ELL Compliance (September 29, 2017), Schoolwide (various dates throughout the school year 2017-2018), iXL (various dates throughout the school year 2017-2018), Math in Focus (September 7, 2017 as well as more dates throughout the school year 2017-2018). ELL teachers will also be in contact with the staff from the Staten Island Field Support Center to keep up to date on current professional learning opportunities and attend these sessions with permission from school leadership. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 21 will be aligning its Professional Development plan to meet the requirements as per CR Part 154.2. P.S. 21 will make sure that 15% of the total hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition and especially focusing on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language instruction for ELLs. The ENL Team of teachers will periodically meet with the principal to discuss professional learning opportunities, share data-driven instruction techniques and results, and discuss the effectiveness of or request additional materials. In addition, the ENL teachers at P.S. 21 will be provided with at least 50% of their required professional development hours in language acquisition, focusing on integrating language and core content instruction for ELLs. These professional development opportunities will be sought out through the resources provided by the Office of ELLs. Records of participation in Professional development activities will be kept through attendance sign in sheets, copies of agendas, and monthly professional development logs sent to the principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 21 ENL teachers will be planning annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development, progress, language proficiency, assessment results, and language development needs. They will be planning these meetings for Tuesday afternoons, during Parent Communication time throughout the months of January and February. A qualified interpreter will be present during these meetings to translate for the parent. In addition, monthly progress reports are sent home in the parents' preferred language so parents can get a sense of their child's academic growth and performance. ENL Teachers are always available during Parent Communication time on Tuesday afternoons either by appointment at the school or via phone conference to discuss any questions or concerns. Parents also have the opportunity to communicate with the ENL teachers at any time that is convenient for them in their home language via the mobile/online app Remind. Attendance sign-in sheets are kept for annual individual meetings with ELL parents. A log is kept for all ELL parent outreach to ensure parent needs are accommodated. This log includes parent phone calls and notices sent home in their native language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S. 21 the ELL parents are invited to participate in a variety of school workshops during and after school. The ELL parents have an opportunity to visit our school's Media Center twice a week. They are encouraged to select from a variety of literature to support the needs of their child, including bilingual books. Another activity that P.S. 21 offers to foster parent involvement is Family Math and Family STEM. Parents are invited to engage in activities and discussions on the various mathematical topics. The parents can utilize the techniques or games to reinforce skills learned at school. Parents of ELLs are also invited and encouraged to participate in the PTA and the School Leadership Team. They have the opportunity to be on these decision-making committees at P.S. 21. Fathers of ELLs are also invited to participate in a series of sessions on Thursday evenings supporting fathers and fostering the community at P.S. 21. These sessions are run by the parent coordinator and can be provided in the parents' preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 77  There are special events held at P.S. 21 throughout the school year specifically to involve parents. Some examples are student success assemblies, Fathers Bring Your Child to School Day, Bring Your Parent to School Day, Multi-Cultural Night, and grade-level events, such as Kindergarten Gingerbread House Building. Parents are also invited to accompany their children on school trips with their child's class. Every class has at least two opportunities to go on a trip throughout the school year, and parents are always invited. Parents are also invited to participate with their child in certain special activities during the After School Programs offered at P.S. 21, such as the Title III zoo and STEM activities, and the drama student performances. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ... 2018-19 CEP 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Cosentino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS21 School DBN: 31R021 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Mr. Anthony Cosentino Principal Ms. Allison Graham Assistant Principal Ms. Jennifer Manik Parent Coordinator Mrs. Karla Espinoza ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Rosa DeJesus Parent Ms. Islam Elslawy/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Jenna Hales/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mr. Charles Fernando School Counselor Mr. Anthony Lodico Mr. Enrico Domingo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 2018-19 CEP 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R021 School Name: Margaret P Emery Elm Park School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Jennifer Manik Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Not yet, but will attend when training is offered Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 21 distributes the Language Preference Survey created by the NYCDOE (available on the NYCDOE website) to every child’s parent (grades K-5) in order to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that parents are provided with information in their preferred language. Surveys were distributed to children, were brought home, and returned to the child’s teacher. Surveys were then collected and the data was compiled. This information is given to the pupil accounting secretary and input into ATS. The RCPL and RAPL reports are then printed from ATS to be checked for accuracy and to analyze the data so adjustments can be made based on parents' home language preferences and needs. This information is kept on file in the parent coordinator's office, so she can assure the distribution of materials from the school in the parent's preferred language. In addition to the surveys, teachers also lend information that they have learned about the language in which parents prefer to communicate through parent interviews, meetings, conversations, etc. The parents' language of preference is also indicated on the child's blue emergency card, as well as the Home Language Identification Survey. In addition, the Parent Coordinator gives out a parent interest survey at the beginning of the 2018-19 CEP 81  school year to find out parent language preference and areas of need as well as possible topics of interest for future parent workshops to be held at P.S. 21. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Spanish English 1 155 225 0.23% 36.13% 63.64% 1 157 223 0.23% 36.6% 63.17% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no low-incidence parent-preferred languages at P.S. 21 at this time. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.S. 21 School Newsletter Monthly Translation & Interpretation Unit IEPs beginning in September and then scheduled as necessary The Big Word company contracted through the Department of Education Principal's Welcome Letter September Parent Coordinator & Translation & Interpretation Unit ELL Entitlement Letters September School-based personnel Parent/Teacher Curriculum Conference September and May Parent/Teacher Conference Notices October and March NYS Testing Dates January Parent Coordinator & Translation & Interpretation Unit School-based personnel School-based personnel 2018-19 CEP 82  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Kindergarten Orientation/Welcome to P.S. 21 IEP meetings PTA meetings Parent Workshops September School-based personnel Starting in October and going throughout the school year as necessary Language Lane company contracted through the Department of Education September and going throughout the school year Parent Coordinator, Paraprofessionals, Bilingual Teachers various dates through out the school year Parent Coordinator Parent/Teacher Conferences November and March ELL Parent Conferences January and February School-based personnel School-based personnel 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. P.S. 21 has several strategies in place to communicate with limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency. The first strategy is to use the Remind communication app. The parents are provided with information and training on what the Remind app is and how to use it in their preferred language during the first parent/teacher conference in September. There will be a message sent out to all users of the Remind app that are part of the school community. These messages can be translated via the app in the parents' preferred language with ease. There will also be a phone blast sent out from the school's communication center. The message will be translated by the parent coordinator and sent in Spanish to a parent if that is their preferred language of communication. There are also designated bilingual staff members in a specific area to communicate with parents face-to-face in case of an emergency at the school. If a parent has an emergency and must contact the school, they will be directed to speak with the parent coordinator or another qualified bilingual staff member. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P.S. 21 will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the resources available to meet compliance in a variety of ways. As part of the Monday After School Professional Development plan, the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will provide the latest information shared with her from the training provided by the Field Language Access Coordinator. She will explain the importance and the significance of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. She will share the data compiled from the RCPL and RAPL and explain the implications of the findings and the accommodations needed to be made for parents. She will go over the Language Translation and 2018-19 CEP 83  Interpretation plan for the school. She will explain the school-based and external resources available to staff members in order to provide the required translations and interpretations for parents. She will give a list of trained translators and interpreters on staff at P.S. 21. Attendance will be taken for this workshop and copies of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan will be distributed to the staff. A log will be kept of the signatures of the staff members that attended this training and received these materials. Copies of these documents will be available in the parent coordinator (LAC)'s office and on P.S. 21's Google Drive as part of the staff handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 21 informs limited-English Proficient parents of their right to receive information in the following ways: • Important documents are translated and sent home with children at the beginning of the year and in a timely fashion throughout the rest of the school year. • Signs indicating the availability of translation services are hung at the entrance of the school building, at the school safety officer’s desk, in stairwells, and in the main office. The parent information bulletin board in the main entrance of the school building has information in both English and Spanish. This information covers a wide variety of school and community related topics and is changed and updated periodically throughout the school year to keep the information current. • Our school provides services such as translation, assistance, welcoming, and kindness to parents in need of language access services in order to ensure that they are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Parents are encouraged to express their needs and concerns related to Language translation and interpretation at any PTA or School Leadership meetings. Any issues of suggestions for improvements may be discussed with the principal or the LAC (parent coordinator) at any time. P.S. 21 has an open door policy for all parents at any time, including limited-English proficient parents. In addition, all notification documents, can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 21 will gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the quality and availability of services during leadership team meetings, PTA meetings, parent surveys given in the beginning of the year and then periodically throughout the school year, feedback forms from parent workshops, and through communication with the parent coordinator and other school staff members. Mid-year, P.S. 21 will distribute a parent survey to request additional feedback about the language services that are available and that they receive. Based on the feedback received from these surveys, parents can provide their input and request additional services or to change the services that are 2018-19 CEP 84  available at P.S. 21. We will formulate this survey based on a template received from our District Field Language Access Coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 85 
