2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75R025 School Name: SOUTH RICHMOND HIGH SCHOOL I.S./P.S. 25 Principal: JAMES MCKEON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 25R-South Richmond H.S. 75R025 307500015025 School Number (DBN): K through 12 Standardized and Alternate 6581 Hylan Boulevard, Staten Island, NY 10309 718-984-1526 Phone Number: 718-356-8905 Fax: James McKeon jmckeon@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: James McKeon Ronald Bruzzese Christopher Litrell Toni Scarpati N/A TianaGonzalez NicoletteO'Donnell Vincent Ignizzio District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 6 Executive Director’s Office Address: Marie Callaghan Executive Director: 400 1st Ave. N.Y, N.Y 10010 MCallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James McKeon Ronald Bruzzese Christopher Litrell N/A N/A TiannaGonzalez NicoletteO'Donnell Vincent Ignizzio Christine Rego Jill Morales *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Paraprofessional Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Marlo Lancia Larsen LoniArcuri Christina GalanteVasquez Deborah Santiago Toni Scarpati Theresa Flynn Christine Dunn Carol Litrell Jessica Malone Lisa Senatore Nellie Correa Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? • Mission Statement: Our mission is to create programs that afford positive experiences for our students. The purpose is to provide opportunities that will enhance student performance as well as move students toward a Least Restrictive Environment . We provide multiple options to achieve Least Restrictive Environment, specifically: Day Treatment; 2018-19 CEP 9  Community Based Instructional Programs; Alternate Assessment; Work Study; and full-time General Education Inclusion (Intermediate and High School). We believe that all children have the potential to succeed. Our vision is to meet the standard academic, social and emotional needs within a safe, clean and nurturing school environment. We challenge students to reach their full potential by providing differentiated instruction throughout all curriculum areas and reward students' success accordingly. We are committed to the mantra that “We may be different, but we are not Less”. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P25R is a K-12 school with 23 locations throughout Staten Island. This response may seem lengthy but due to the diverse population of the school it is the only way we can address all the issues that our population covers. We currently service over 561 students across grades K-12 . 25% percent of the population are students who are in alternate assessment classrooms and 1% are English language learners (ELLs). This coming September we will be adding classes in Alternate Assessment Prek-2 and high-school 9-12. P25R is a safe and nurturing learning environment, where each of the various subgroups, including alternate assessment and ELL's, have access to the same, rigorous common core curriculum. The school community cultivates a culture that all students can succeed. The administration clearly conveys the instructional expectations to teachers through professional developments that are geared towards the needs of our population. Administration assesses rigor by evaluating student work through formal and informal observations. Self Assessment is incorporated in all teacher's lessons, and students are continuously being assessed based on content. Post observation conferences revolve around meeting the needs of all learners that should be evident through planning and preparation. Teachers are encouraged to convey expectations to students by creating clearly defined tasks with the expectation that students can speak to it. In addition, teachers work collaboratively with peers to design rigorous, coherent instruction. P25R has a school wide initiative in Reading during the 2018-2019 school year. The results from The Writing Revolution: Hochman Method showed the need to incorporate a reading program within our school. P25R has selected Lexia to increase reading levels that focus on decoding, phonemic awareness, blending, segmenting and fluency for all K-12 students. Another emphasis during the 2018-2019 school year is to sustain former partnerships with D31 schools and create new partnerships with our D75 schools through the Learning Partners Program. These collaborations will include parents/guardians, and outside community in supporting our students to ensure academic success in alternate and standardized programs. Through these partnerships, students have opportunities to explore the community, while also growing academically through reading, writing, listening and speaking. Teachers also have the opportunity to serve as model teachers throughout the organization. 2018-19 CEP 10  Through partnering with local politicians, we anticipate receiving resources to implement various academic and technology programs. Schools within D75 will also have the opportunity to bridge the gap in transitioning from middle school into high school within both regular and special education. The impact is apparent in our learning communities, where teachers are consistently using the principles of Universal Design Learning and Depth of Knowledge Questioning. This can be seen in teacher's lesson plans when asking three tiered leveled questioning. In alternate classrooms, the impact shows students are provided with communication devices and supports to give them access to curriculum. Within all classrooms, groups of students are working on various levels and using different hands-on materials to achieve the same goal. Classroom teachers are incorporating technology to improve student engagement and most importantly, students are mastering their goals identified via SANDI, as is evidenced in their student portfolios. We have also been accepted in the 2018-2019 school year to host the Learning Collaboration Partnership with three District 75 schools . The focus of this initiative is to examine rigorous instruction and to prepare students transitioning from middle school into high school. Our Safe and Caring Schools Program complements and enhances the academic training students receive at school and is based upon sound social and emotional learning practices that target self- awareness, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision making. The effectiveness of this program has been evidenced by improvement in student behavior within the classroom, as well as throughout the building and an increase in parental involvement through Partnering with Parents. This has led to the building of staff and student relationships on a professional level. There are several initiatives that were introduced during the 2017-2018 school year at P25R that promoted college and career readiness that will continue during the 2018-2019 school year. • Collaborations/Partnerships: As a community school, we have partnered with Learning Partners and Inclusion Programs, which has led to strengthening our District 31 school resources. Teachers are given the opportunity to have inter-visitations with other P25R teachers, as well as teachers from non-District 75 Staten Island schools through our Inclusion Program and with the Learning Partner Program. Our school has also reached-out to the Staten Island business community to form partnerships with the intention of giving students the opportunity to learn employment skills, as well as teaching them the importance of good inter-personal relations and developing social skills. In order to enhance the school-to-work experience, our staff and students are on-site at Staten Island University Hospital North and South, United Cerebral Palsy, South Richmond Maintenance Program, Sea View Rehabilitation Center, A.M.E., and PS 37R Paraprofessional Training Program. Our alternate assessment program has expanded the vocational work experience within Staten Island retail businesses and the restaurant industry to include such businesses as Shop Rite, Target, Applebees and Costco. We have also looked to further develop the school-to-work experience by broadening programs available for our students to 2018-19 CEP 11  included clerical office positions. These programs have enabled our school to develop successful long-term partnerships. These partnerships have formed a trustworthy relationship within several Staten Island businesses, and thus enabling the continued expansion of future programs. Our school has developed relationships with local politicians and philanthropists in order to obtain funding for technology and special initiatives. • Special Initiatives P25r has added 16 new teachers to our staff. We opened 6 new classes of alternate assessment at our P3 annex. Two pre-k multiple disability classes and 4 turning five classes. We also added five high school alternate classes at Port Richmond High school. Two 6:1:1 classes and three 12:1:1 alternate Ed classes. We have purchased Attainment curriculum Prek-12th grade for alternate assessment . Teacher training will be provided through learning communities and collaborative Professional development periods. Our school has commenced the Writing Revolution Advancing Thinking Through Writing Method. Teachers were sent for professional development, and turnkey strategies have been implemented in the Learning Communities in order to continue the roll out phase. Administration has budgeted funds to continue teacher professional development and is continuing to collaborate with New Dorp High School, a non-District 75 High School, to assist us in achieving success in this program. . We expanded our 6:1:1 program at IS 75 by adding another class in 2017/2018. We will continue to collaborate with IS 75 which has been chosen a model school within D31. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The challenges faced by our school are serving a special population of students grades K-12, alternate and standardized, which is spread throughout Staten Island and located within 23 separate sites. Disabilities include Mental Health, Anxiety, Emotionally Challenged, Learning Disabled and Autism. Administration must strategically plan learning communities for teachers in different curricula areas who are assigned to these 22 sites to meet and collaborate. It is a challenge administratively to do observations on a more frequent basis. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 12  • Growth of Previous Year: Following an analysis of the 2017/2018 New York City School Survey Report compared to the 2016/2017 New York City School Survey Report, we have evidence that there is an 5% overall growth in satisfaction by Parents who took the survey. Specifically, parents feel strongly that the school communicates in languages that parents can understand. Parents strongly agree that the school has high expectations for their child and strongly agree that they would recommend the school. Also, evidence shows that there is a 100% overall growth in satisfaction by students who took the survey. Specifically, students strongly agree in the following areas: that they are excited about learning, we keep them on track for college or career readiness, they feel safe in classes, school property, and that the school has clear consequences for breaking the rules. The school community also treats each other (adults and students) with respect. • Focus for Future: During 2018/2019 our school will be continuing to focus on our new alternate classes at P3 Annex,Port Richmond, IS75, P25R South Richmond Annex and IS7. Training alternate teachers on Prek-SANDI/FAST assessment K-2, SANDI/FAST 3-12 and on alternate curricula, Attainment and Unique. We are establishing new schedules and setting up a collaborative partnerships with P3, IS75, IS34,IS7,&IS61 and Port Richmond High School. Our standardized schools continuing to focus on improving writing skills for all students in grades PreK-12. We are continuing to collaborate with the Writing Revolution and First Author Prek-5th grade alternate. The Writing Revolution is a guide for teachers to help students of all grades, and abilities, to develop expository-writing skills. The goals and activities are developed to provide systematic instruction for large classes, small groups, and tutorials. We currently have 42 teachers trained in Writer's Revolution. We will be focusing on our new reading program Lexia to increase reading levels. All learning communities have at least one trained teacher in the writing program and will also be trained in Lexia in the 2018-2019 school year. Our teachers have been involved in turn key meetings and collaborate within their curriculum areas routinely. Some of our teachers will also be part of a leadership committee that is going to focus on middle school collaboration within District 75 Staten Island schools. We are building a partnership with partnering schools to align our feeder schools with the knowledge of our strengths as a District 75 program. We are also looking to bridging the gap of preparing our elementary D75 schools to transition into our middle school programs and again into our high school programs. We have focused our parent out-reach in expanding the workshops for all District 75 parents. Parent Coordinators have aligned their resources with District 75 and have received budgetary help through the District. Our two new alternate assessment programs at P3 annex and Port Richmond high school will need a lot of support for new teachers.. Our new teachers will need to be trained on The Attainment Curriculum and The SANDI/FAST /NYSAA Assessments and Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI). The new 6:1:1 and turning five teachers will also need training in , PECS and Programatic Devices for Communication and access to the curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75R025 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 560 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 35 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 2 School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 30.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 1% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 12 0.0% 0.4% 99.8% 38.6% 1.8% 1.6% 8 11% 7.9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: Our Multiple disability Pre-K classes will be following The Frameworks for Universal Pre-k for standardized students- and differentiate the instruction using The Attainment PASS Curriculum for the alternate students and students scoring below standards. Our turning five programs will be following The Attainment Pass Curriculum for ELA and Early Numeracy Curriculum for math. They will be assessed by SANDI/FAST if students are alternate assessment and Teachers College if standardized. Our Grade 2-5 standardized will be using Units of Study that were differentiated from Engage New York. They will be assessed in ELA by using Teachers College and scantron from 3rd-5th grade. Our alternate classes will be using First Author for writing and Pathways To Literacy for ELA. Our Math curriculum is Go Math for standardized and Early Numeracy Curriculum for alternate assessment. (Standardized Middle School Students) Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core Standards.(Starting to look and unpack Next Generation Standards through our learning communities). High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activities and are continuing to developing critical thinking skills. . Our 3rd - 12th grade student data in 2017 /2018 showed students performing in English Language Arts at the following levels: Out of 279 students taking the 3-12 state exams 178 are at Level 1, 38 at Level 2, 2 at Level 3, and 0 at Level 4. For 2018, the goal of the Common Core State Standards has been aligned to the English Language Arts pacing Calendar and the focus is on the knowledge and skills needed by all students so they can be successful in college and careers. Our learning communities will start unpacking The Next Generation Standards and aligning the units of study to them. Our high schools alternate curriculum is using teaching to The Standards English Language Arts Curriculum from Attainment and Hands on Math for our Math programs. Our standardized high school classes can earn regents credit and follow a standardized curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 15  Curriculum packets for both middle and high school students attending summer school have been designed to help bridge the gap from middle school to high school academics and to promote continued focus in preparation for Regents within the high school population. In Mathematics the learning communities showed that CMP3 curriculum was too difficult for middle school students. Instead, we have purchased The GO Math Curriculum as a result of this inquiry and will continue to be implementing this curriculum in the 2018-2019 year. P25R’s needs assessment in math state test scores from 2017-2018 show of 170 students who took the assessment, 170 achieved Level 1 status, Levels 2, 3, and 4 all identified the need to align standards, curriculum, instruction, and assessment goals with proved instructional practices that use developmentally appropriate teaching methods to address the needs of these student subgroups. More training will be needed in Go Math Programs (i.e. Go Math K-5 and Go Math (6-8)). Teachers will systematically organize their lessons around the critical areas from the Common Core standards. The Go Math program, K-8, includes five tiers of instruction that teachers will learn for every lesson, including standard lessons, three levels of intervention for students who struggle, and enrichment materials for students who are ready to go beyond the standard lesson. The various mathematical models incorporated throughout the curriculum build from concrete to abstract and provide explicit opportunities for students to engage in mathematical discourse with a focus on reasoning and constructing mathematical arguments. The E.L.A. department immediately addressed the students need by immediately revising the E.L.A. pacing calendar that required the students to analyze issues of interest and write an argumentative essay. A summer school packet was developed that was geared towards building the skills students need to be successful at passing the E.L.A. Regent. Each packet addresses: reading comprehension annotating    Writer’s Revolution techniques: to enhance written responses   self-assessment checklists a drafted essay by using a multiple paragraph outline (M.P.O.)  The two main components are: text analysis and argumentative writing Our math learning community suggested not all assessments would be given in the program, as with the correct assessments given, there would be no need to continuously test students within such a short duration. Teachers will however continue to use the assessments that make sense given the overall assessment picture for their class and school. Math teachers will make adjustments to the pacing of the curriculum, as they choose, as to best ensure continued success of all students to achieve success in obtaining new skills. By allowing flexibility within the classrooms, teachers will be able to better address the individual needs of their students, while also making more effective use of class time. Grappling our student’s instructional decisions is essential to the implementation of new curricula. Teachers and teacher teams, in consultation with our administration, will engage in professional dialogue about adapting the materials to meet their students’ learning needs. This will occur as part of ongoing lesson planning and/or during common planning time which is built in teacher schedules currently. Rigorous Instruction (Alternate Students): P25R ‘s alternate assessment program consists of two Prek- 6 turning five, 4- and 2-5th grade located at P3 annex, three 6:1:1 middle school classes at IS75, 1 Emotionally Challenged alternate 12:1:1 class at IS7, one 12:1:1 high school program at P25R Main/South Richmond High School,2- 6:1:1 & three 12:1:1 2018-19 CEP 16  high school alternate assessment programs at Port Richmond and one 6:1:1 high school program located at South Richmond HS Annex @ IS25. In September 2018 we increased our alternate program by adding two pre-k classes four turning five classes at P3 annex, 2 6:1:1 class at Port Richmond, and three alternate Emotionally Challenged programs at Port Richmond. Thus increasing the alternate population to 80 students. All Alternate Assessment students are following The New York State Alternate Assessment as a part of the New York State Testing Program. The New York state Alternate Assessment Test is an assessment called KITE, in which students with severe cognitive disabilities demonstrate their performance toward achieving the New York State learning standards. A collegial review for our students is also facilitated in which a Lead Special Education Teacher who has compiled a New York State Alternate Assessment data folio has a colleague, peer, or administrator who is familiar with the requirements of the New York State Alternate Assessment review student data folio contents for errors, omissions or needed revisions. Further curricula includes Attainment. This curriculum was purchased for each classroom Prek-12th grade to increase rigorous instruction. In addition, P25 also purchased a supplemental aligned curriculum called UNIQUE. Attainments Core Curriculum Solutions for Elementary, Secondary, and Transition and our turning five program we will be purchasing additional Attainment books and supplementing the Unique Curriculum, to help differentiate the functional levels of each student in order to promote I.E.P. goals. Supportive Environment- Our Learning Communities this year will focus on Engage New York E.L.A. Units of Study. Teachers will emphasis the need to mirror the Next Generation Writing Standards that focuses on our student’s abilities to make an argument and write to inform and/or explain. Students will take the modules and differentiate them to meet the individual needs of our students. We continue to see the need for a writing program to support students writing deficiencies and will incorporate more Writing Revolution training for our staff. The shift in both reading and writing constitutes a significant change from the traditional focus in our English Language Arts classrooms from narrative text, or the narrative aspects of literary non-fiction (the characters and the story), towards more in-depth engagement with informational and argumentative aspects of these texts. A significant percentage of questions/tasks are text dependent. Our teacher observations show that questions and tasks require the use of textual evidence, thus including supporting logical inferences from the text. The Common Core Standards require our students to become more adept at drawing evidence from the text and explaining that evidence orally and in writing. We will also focus on our students reading levels using The Qualitative Reading Inventory for site words and Lexia Reading Program for reading academic intervention. Committees of teachers from D75 along with teachers from Learning Partners, who served as content experts, and special educators were brought together to review the English Language Arts for the content identified in the new test blueprint, to develop Essence statements to narrow the depth and breadth of the English Language Arts, and draft” Extensions” (the new Extensions are analogous to the current Alternate Grade Level Indicators). Extensions are descriptions of student performance expectations that realigned to the Common Core Learning Standards for students with severe cognitive disabilities. The proposed Essences and Extensions were reviewed extensively during 2018-19 CEP 17  the summer of 2016, and draft documents were posted for public comment in September 2017. In October 2017, the committees were reconvened to review the revisions to the Essences and Extensions, and to draft Assessment Tasks to measure student performance on the English Language Arts. Following the meeting, the draft Assessment Tasks were reviewed and vetted by content and special education teachers. (Alternate support) Our four new classes for turning five at P3 Annex will continue to be a focus for the alternate program, as well as the one class at IS 75, and the three new classes at IS61. Teachers will need support to be trained in the NYSAA Assessment,SANDI/FAST, Autism, and Attainment/Unique curricula. To support the alternate teachers in 3rd-12th grade : At a minimum, one collegial review for P25R must be conducted for each data-folio, after the teacher completes it. This review is held during the New York State Alternate Assessment administration period and at a point when any necessary revisions can be made before the end of the administration period. The month of the last collegial review session is documented on the student page of the data folio. A Collegial review does not guarantee that a data-folio will meet the procedural requirements for the assessment, however our collegial review provides feedback to the teacher on whether the appropriate connections have been made among the Alternate Grade Level Indicators, the assessment tasks, and the verifying evidence selected for a given student. After last year’s assessment of our programs we needed to continue to demonstrate evidence to show a curriculum’s K-12 assessments that would show student progress across P25R’s alternate assessment population specifically in our new 6:1:1 programs, now first grade. We decided that the Measure of Student Learning for our alternate elementary and secondary teachers would be the SANDI/FAST to show student progress for elementary, New York State Alternate Assessment to New York State Alternate Assessment for our middle schools Through our learning communities we found out that the alternative assessment instruments are not only designed and structured differently from traditional tests, but are also graded or scored differently. Being that alternative assessment is performance based, it helps our teachers emphasize the point of language learning is communication for meaningful purposes. Alternative assessment methods work well in learner-centered classrooms because they are based on the idea that students can evaluate their own learning and grow from the evaluation process. These methods will be taught to teachers to enable opportunities to reflect on both their linguistic development and their learning processes. P25r’s alternative assessment thus will give our teachers a way to connect assessment with review of learning strategies. Teachers will also get trained on the new features of alternative assessment: Assessment will be based on authentic tasks that demonstrate learners' ability to accomplish communication goals .The teacher and learners will focus on communication, not on right and wrong answers. The students will help to set the criteria for successful completion of communication tasks. The students have opportunities to assess themselves and their peers. Effective School Leadership Our Cabinet meets once a week to discuss the needs of our rigorous curriculum. The focus of P25R is continues to be aligning the curriculum materials that include explicit models of high quality evidence-based answers to questions samples of proficient student responses about specific texts from each grade. Questions designed at cabinet require students to demonstrate that they follow the details of what is explicitly stated but also are able to make non-trivial inferences beyond what is explicitly stated in the text to what logically follows from the evidence in the text. P25R’s analysis of materials focus on text based activities rather than activities where text plays an ancillary role. We researched our new materials aligned to the Next Generation Standards where we assessed and designed the central focus of classroom time to be spent on close reading, including writing from sources and conversations (speaking and listening) that center on the text. Rather than consigned to the margins when completing assignments, close and careful readings will be an essential and central part of all classroom activities. The Generation Standards require students to show that they can analyze and synthesize sources and present careful analysis and clear information, and it is our job in cabinet to align these skills with the curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 18  Collaborative Teachers: Our inquiry team utilized the Quality Reading Inventory, Periodic Assessments ( Ed Performance/ Scantron Series), which enabled us to diagnose students in terms of reading strengths and weakness. Some assessments provided recommendations for targeted interventions depending on results. Teachers were provided with a master sheet, indicating test results and included the format, skills, content and strategies needed with regarding each test that is offered, an understanding of various assessments, and targeted intervention strategies using our data analysis. It is our belief that regardless of content area, teachers need to be aware of this information and collaborate to maximize student preparation. Literacy skills are embedded in all content areas. We also hope to improve our initial assessments of students so that we are better able to provide targeted interventions to our learners. Teachers will use the Qualitative Reading Inventory, which will give them the student functional level for reading. This information will be used to set up the students for the Ed Performance/Scantron assessment, and Lexia reading Program which in turn, will give them the students’ performance level. Teachers are encouraged to use this data to drive instruction, and to differentiate instruction in order to meet students learning needs and provide targeted intervention to learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 P25r will align Next Generation Standards to our Units Of Study for grades K - 12. This will demonstrate a 3 % gain on the 2019 NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Train all teachers standardized and alternate in Lexia Learning. Set up accounts for each teacher and provide professional development on an ongoing basis through E.L.A. Learning Communities. Students in all academic and elective courses Sept 2018- November 2018 Collaborative teams within content areas. Assistant principal will supervise the work. All lower level 1 learners Sept 2018- Feb 2019 Teacher Learning Communities Continue to design strategies and activities for all content areas that support the development of strong writing skills, utilizing the scaffold approach created by Judith Hochman for Writer's Revolution. Writing strategies will begin at the sentence level and lead up to the construction of research papers in all content areas, grades 6 through 12. Continue to utilize teacher teams in developing activities that incorporate writing skills infused in all content work. Vocational will be merged into lesson planning. Inter- visitations will be made available for teachers to turnkey the Writer's Revolution skills. All students Artifacts will be collected/ reviewed four times a year (Nov, Jan, Apr and June) to review with students their individual progress. Sept 2018- June 2019 Teacher Learning Communities Inquiry Team Continue to design next generation tasks that build upon the strategies and skills addressed by the Hochman program, that lead to higher expectations and more rigorous instruction. Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 Utilize activities as assessments that will evaluate skill development as well as the content knowledge of the course. Continue to send teachers to Professional Development in Writer's Revolution By June of 2019, 60% of core content curriculum K-12th grade will have lessons aligned to the Judith Hochman's Writer's Revolution program as well as be fully aligned to the Common Core Standards. This will be in the form of unit packets and full curriculum documents. The content-based writing activities in each content class will focus on skill deficits but support the delivery of the content curriculum. The goal will be to bridge the skill gap. Writing portfolios will be reviewed to utilize a movement of at least one level on all rubrics by the end of January, and a second level by June. Teacher Teams will update the units of study to utilize the Hochman Method in their curriculum and align to Next generation standards. Design New York State Regents essay questions to incorporate Writer's Revolution method. Teachers Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Lead teachers Administration Students Work will be measured monthly by Assistant Principals. Teacher teams across all curriculum areas will meet weekly to discuss alignment of units of study. Essay questions will be the focus of discussion for student work and needs improvement. Programming will allow teachers to meet in Learning Communities on a monthly basis. Writer's Revolution Coach Administration Teachers District 75 Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Monthly Leadership team meetings, administration will update the P.T.A. on progress and PD times that parents can attend the school and meet with ELA teams to discuss shifts in the curriculum. During open school nights parents will get an overview of the new standards and implementation. The school will offer workshops for parents in different areas and inform them of workshops within the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  Per Session Funding, Instructional Funds, Creative programming, and purchasing Writer's Revolution and workbooks aligned with Next Generations Standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By November 2018, all teachers will be trained in Lexia.  By February 26, 2019 an additional six teachers will be trained in Writers Revolution.  Administration will do a formal evaluation (walk through) of the implementation of Writer's Revolution and Lexia benchmarks. Pacing calendar will be used to monitor teacher and student progress.  Model teachers will assist teachers with Writer's Revolution and Lexia Trainings. Lesson planning templates will have been created in collaboration with teachers and administration to monitor design of coherent instruction.  Teacher teams will meet on an ongoing basis to discuss all components of the curriculum, its effectiveness, and whether students of all abilities are able to meet and/or exceed the expectations of the C.C.L.S.  Teachers analyze and discuss the effectiveness of the implemented instructional goals/next steps based on results from assessment data; such as; class formative assessments (ongoing), benchmarks (during the units of study), and performance tasks (end of units of study),  As of February 26, 2019 all training and Professional Development is on pace to meet the midpoint goal. Teacher teams have continued to meet and gather data for assessment. All goals according to the plan are in motion and I anticipate meeting these goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Scantron testing. and QRI (Qualitative Reading Inventory) are used to assess words in isolation and reading comprehension, Lexia pre/post testing, Ed Performance Series, Observation walk through, Lesson plan alignment to component 3D of the Danielson Rubric. Formal Assessment tools used to collect data and align with student progress on Scantron. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Rigorous Instruction : As per the 2015-2016 Quality Review, our school has collaboratively created a rigorous curriculum aligned to the C.C.L.S. integrating the instructional shifts across all grades and subject areas. The school curriculum ensures interdisciplinary connections integrated in English Language Arts to provide students with deep connections to social studies and science content. All students including Alternate assessment and English Language Learners are engaged in tasks that are rigorous and engaging and are producing meaningful work products that are aligned to the C.C.L.S. Rigorous habits and higher order skills based on Depth of Knowledge (DOK) are embedded in daily tasks so that all students can demonstrate their thinking. Teaching strategies allow for multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher order thinking skills. School wide, teachers use and create common assessments, rubrics and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curriculum and analyze the assessment data by and use the information on student outcomes to plan for instruction. Teachers provide meaningful feedback to students regarding their performance. Students are engaged in self assessments and are working towards becoming aware of their next steps for learning in all subject areas.Through implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, Domain 3 from Advance our teachers are on average rated as effective (85%) with 10% achieving a highly effective rating. This domain includes using questioning and discussion techniques, engaging students in learning and using assessment in instruction. Our goal is to have more teachers rate highly effective in this domain. Collaborative Teachers & Staff: Our teachers and staff show collaboration by participating in professional development through D75,Friday afternoon P.D.'s and through Learning Communities. P25r's learning communities meet to discuss student progress in E.L.A,Science,Math,Social Studies, Related Services, Transition and Alternate Assessment. At P25R we have approximately 72 students with crisis management paraprofessionals and fifteen students with health paras. These paras continue to aim at improving student behavior and to promote independence by completing functional behavior assessments , Behavior Intervention Plans and decrease the need for crisis paraprofessional when appropriate. Supportive Environment : P25r’s school climate is defined as having the quality and character of school life. It is based on patterns of student, parent, and school personnel experiences within the school and reflects norms, goals, values, interpersonal relationships, teaching and learning practices, and organizational structures. Key factors impacting our 2018-19 CEP 23  school climate include, but are not limited to, our perception of their personal safety, interpersonal relationships, teaching, learning, as well as the external environment. Our sustainable, positive school climate throughout 22 sites fosters our youth development and learning necessary for a productive, contributing and satisfying life in a democratic society. Our climate includes: Norms, values and expectations that support people feeling socially, emotionally and physically safe. Students, families and educators work together to develop, live and contribute to a shared school vision. Each person contributes to the operations of the school and the care of the physical environment. At P 25R we use whole school approach to build student readiness. There is an expectation that our school promote a positive school culture that encourages interpersonal and inter-group respect among students and between students and staff. To ensure that our school provide all students with a supportive and safe environment in which to grow and thrive academically and socially, each of the following facets of our school community is discussed during our school safety meetings: Social Environment   • Interpersonal Relations: Students & Staff   • Respect for Diversity   • Emotional Well Being and Sense of Safety   • Student Engagement   • School & Family Collaboration   • Community Partnerships Physical Environment   • Building Conditions   • Physical Safety   • School Wide Protocols   • Classroom Management Behavioral Environment, Expectations & Supports   • Physical & Mental Well Being   • Prevention & Intervention Services   • Behavioral Accountability (Disciplinary and Intervention Responses) As per the Quality Review, of 2015-2016, the school culture of mutual trust and collaboration is highly structured so that all stakeholders are committed to support the academic, vocational, functional and social-emotional needs of students, resulting in improved outcomes. Effective School Leadership: At P25R our leadership stands on establishing behavioral expectations for students, staff, and visitors that encourage a positive and respectful school climate and culture are essential to creating and maintaining a safe and supportive school community as reflected in our student and teacher handbook. We follow New York State Commissioner’s regulation that reflects the Dignity Act’s requirement that boards of education create policies, procedures and guidelines intended to create a school environment that is free from harassment, bullying and discrimination (see Education Law §13). P25 R’s cabinet meet weekly to discuss school safety issues throughout all 22-school sites of the organization and student's academic progress. We have monthly school safety meetings and run monthly reports for our school wide information system in order to conduct informational meetings with staff and families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. P25r alternate assessment students K-12 will demonstrate a 5% increase in areas of Math,(Operations & Algebra) with implementation of targeted instructional strategies as measured by Fall/Spring SANDI and FAST assessment results By June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Train Teachers on using self-assessment in their classrooms through Learning Partners and Learning Communities. Create learning partnerships with D75- Staten island Schools. Support teacher growth by implementing Inter-visitations with partner schools. Use the Inquiry process to develop and monitor approaches to improving student outcomes. Address the gaps between where students are, and the expectations of the Common Core through curriculum alignment and/or targeted academic interventions. Strengthen instruction in specific academic areas. Promote family and community engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Middle School teachers Admin. Middle School students Community Middle Schools Parents District Level Admin. Model Teachers Learning Communities Inquiry Team Teacher Curriculum teams Learning Partners will begin June 29, 2017. The program will continue through July and August for the five schools to establish a focus for Sept. Principals and Learning Partner Supervisors began to meet in May to establish eligibility for the program. Collaborative teams within content areas. Assistant principals will supervise work. Teacher Learning Communities Inquiry Team Lead/model teachers Administration This collaboration will be monitored through the school year. Students Writer's Revolution Coach Partner school teachers, 2018-19 CEP 25  administrators and students. Learning Partnership Central Personnel District Administration Administration will overlook self assessment initiatives, from periodic data analysis, cycles of observation, learning walks, weekly meetings. All teachers Weekly walk Administration -throughs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will collaborate with other D75 schools on Staten island for workshops on autism,self direction,transition,positive behavior supports. We also will will work with the colleges supporting our middle school college initiative by having open professional developments for our D75 colleagues in Staten island through Learning Partners.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Learning Partner Program Funding, Per Session, Instructional, Creative Programming, Teacher Coverages Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers monitor progress through formal and informal assessments. Student progress is monitored monthly through learning communities (observing student portfolios and analyzing data through our inquiry team). Informal assessments ongoing .Formal November 2018 and May 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Through frequent walk-throughs by administration student self assessment is being assessed through the Advance Process of Observation. Teachers have met in teams to create different forms of student self assessment. It is clear that we are on pace to accomplish this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance System. Attendance, teacher monitoring. A.T.S. system monitoring. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: At P25R our collaborative teacher practices shows that teacher expertise is the most significant school-based influence on student learning. As a school we are committed in making investments in enhancing teacher expertise that would be a major focus of school improvement efforts. Our experience shows that on professional development, one sees an increasing attention to embedding teacher learning opportunities in the day-to-day work of our school and spending less time in formal, instructor-centered situations and more time developing expertise in the context of collaborative problem solving that characterizes our professional learning communities and our school team meetings. We believe that our Collaborative Classrooms are active, engaging places where instruction centers on student thinking. Our Collaborative Classrooms rely on teachers who are skilled facilitators and use evidence-based practices to support student development. Lessons in these classrooms provide rich opportunities for students to work together, grow ideas, revise their thinking, and construct meaning. These resources highlight key facilitation techniques and other ways to create space for students to struggle and learn, so that they are the ones tired at the end of the day. Supportive Environment : P25 R has teachers that are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. Teachers have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Our school provides: Order & Discipline : the school is a safe environment where rules are consistently enforced and administrators assist teachers in their efforts to maintain an orderly classroom; Peer Collaboration : teachers are able to collaborate to refine their teaching practices and work together to solve problems in the school through learning communities and common preps . Principal Leadership : our administration supports teachers and address their concerns about school issues; Professional development : P25R provides sufficient time and resources for professional development and uses them in ways that enhance teachers’ instructional abilities; Teachers have professional development periods once a week on Fridays as well as have the opportunity to go to outside pd supported by D31 and D75. School Culture : Our school environment is characterized by mutual trust, respect, openness, and commitment to student achievement; 2018-19 CEP 28  Teacher Evaluation : Teacher evaluations provide meaningful feedback verbal and written that helps teachers improve their instruction, and is conducted in an objective and professional manner. Effective School Leadership: As a cabinet we determine what the content of the professional development experiences should be for our teachers. We developed a shared vision. Our organization not only develops and communicates its vision but also considers the use of its vision, making decisions consistent with the vision as “evidence by our organization’s commitment to its role and to itself. We design targeted professional development programs and practices. We identify what resources are needed and where they can be secured. We integrate professional development with the comprehensive plan for school improvement. P25R also implements and evaluates the effectiveness of the professional development strategies. We look to define and describe what the district and New York State Education Department is requiring us to support and we train the lead teachers in the professional learning communities; We describe what happens when a school staff studies, works, plans, and takes action collectively on behalf of increased learning for students. We assess what is known and create such communities of professionals in our school. Our Focus this year from our assessments is students writing. Our cabinet is faced with many challenges that we have to do to provide professional development to our staff. Double existing planning time for administrators and key staff doing turnkey training. Schedule common planning time around non teaching time Combine classes to create larger classes to free up some teachers, e.g., for physical education Combine classes on basis to free up a teacher to visit or otherwise bring back knowledge to the team or school Create learning activities that do not require the presence of certified teachers Early release days once a week on Fridays so we need to change the school schedule through an School Based Option ( SBO ) process with the teachers union. Collaborative Teachers: P25r has developed a professional development calendar for the year giving the dates for the learning communities in English Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies, Related Services, Special Education Teacher Support Service and Transition that meet monthly. As per the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the school has Professional Learning communities, which is a cross-site team, that has taken an Inquiry stance when looking at a variety of hard and soft student data to best determine which intervention would best meet the academic as well as social emotional needs of each student. A school based option vote for early Friday student dismissal creates a structured and consistent block of time for administration and staff to meet in addressing improvements on planning and instruction, based on a variety of data points. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 29  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 related services will collaborate with classroom teachers to support student learning in the classroom to ensure movement of students to Least Restrictive Environment as evidenced by an overall 3% movement to LRE in related service mandates. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Alternate Assessment Learning Communities will collaborate on a monthly basis. AA Teachers Professional Development Days in September 2018 100% of alternate assessment teachers will be trained on Attainment & Unique Curriculum. Fall 2018 through June 2019- core AA teacher teams will meet monthly. AA Paras Admin. Inquiry Team Community K-5 Schools Pacing Calendars will be created through learning communities for Turning Five Program and new middle school programs. Community Middle Schools Administration team will review ABBLS Baseline results November 2018. Community High Schools Parents District level administration. Administration team will review fast Benchmark 1 Assessments results December 2018. Model Teachers Administration team will review SANDI/FAST Assessment- May 2019 and student portfolios Review evaluations and feedback from professional development workshops to identify high leverage needs and Three elementary at P3, Middle at IS75 and High School at IS25. P3 annex Alternate Assessment Teachers Alternate Assessment Students Inquiry Team 2018-19 CEP 31  priorities. Revise school wide professional development plan/calendar accordingly. Administrative team reviews sample work products created by teachers and completed student work during Learning Community Meetings. Review SANDI/FAST scores and Individual Education Plan goals to showing student progress. Administrative and teacher teams review student Individual Education Plan data (using SESIS ) and unit pre/post test data from Land of The Letter People on a monthly basis to guide unit planning and pacing. AA Learning Community By Feb. 26, 2019 administration will evaluate progress of training. AA Teacher Teams Lead Teachers Administration Parents 2018-19 CEP 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P25r will support professional workshops in autism,positive behavior supports, curriculum, related services, transition and toileting. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase Unique Curriculum for differentiation in all alternate classes. Purchase Attainment books to supplement Attainment curriculum. Turn Key Training through Professional Learning and teacher teams. Schedules are aligned for teachers to meet in common planning time. Pre and Post testing will be the data. Learning communities will be scheduled for common time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Pre and Post test results will be examined by teacher teams and administration. Learning community data will be assessed on a monthly basis for progress monitoring. Learning community data will show a 3% increase in literacy based on Attainment from September 2018 Baseline assessments -May 2019. By February 2019 a bench mark test will be given to see what Through a Chancellor's initiative Learning Partners, which we are the host school, we have increased inter-visitation and we are exceeding our 5% goal. Collaboration with alternate assessment schools such as P37 and P373 have enhanced our practice in alternate assessment pedagogy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sandi/FAST & NYSAA will be the instrument used in Alternate Assessment. Learning Communities for alternate teacher teams. Informal and Formative testing results from student work. Frequent observational walk through to monitor teacher progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by Math state test scores and scantron test scores , walk throughs , observations , inquiry team data and sitting in on teacher team meetings, it was determined that there was a need to refine the math curriculum and develop pacing calendars that lead up to a culminating performance task. After review of previous informal and formal observations, Principal has determined the need for consistent , clear expectation and academic strategies to formalize designing coherent instruction. The 2015-16 School Survey indicated that 38% of teachers felt that needed more opportunity to work productively with colleagues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P25r school leadership will increase the number of opportunities for professional development for teachers by 5% based on an influx of sixteen new teacher hires, (opening two new programs), OORS data and Advance. Providing PD opportunities, will have an overall positive impact on decreasing students' behavior by 3%, reflective within OORS data. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Mentoring system for new teachers in place to help new staff assimilate into school routines and practices. All new Teachers 9/18to 6/19 Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers , Administration, District TCI Trainings. Common planning time worked into the revised schedule to ensure collaboration. P25R is an active participant in the Chancellor initiative Learning Partners, teachers will collaborate with District 31 and work productively through inter-visitation to help train parents in their students related service needs.. P25R will be active in the Chancellor Initiative Showcase Schools with New Dorp H.S. to collaborate on the P25 Writing initiative Writing Revolution. All Teachers 9/18to 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams All Alternate Teachers 9/18 to6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams, teachers All Teachers 9/18 to6/19 Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P25r will be collaborating with the following community organizations: Notre Dame Club, MIV,New York State Park Service, Conference House Park and various local merchants. We also will be partnering with our congressman and Borough President to get funding for our organization for technology through RESO A grants. Parents will participate on our leadership team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 35  Professional Learning time, common planning, Learning Partners, Show Case Schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Professional Development Calendar designed by school Administration. February 26,2019 Set up school visits with Learning Partner Schools. Teachers analyze and discuss the effectiveness of the implemented instructional goals/next steps based on results from assessment data; such as; class formative assessments (ongoing), benchmarks (during the units of study), performance tasks (end of units of study). Teacher teams meet on an ongoing basis to discuss all components of the curriculum, its effectiveness, and whether students of all abilities are able to meet and/or exceed the expectations of the Next Generation Standards Agendas from learning communities in Binders for each subject area. Inquiry data collected and analyzed Identify success measures of the Professional Development conducted. As of this midpoint we are meeting our goals and anticipate surpassing through College Access Now, Parents College Informational Session, Related Service and what it means to your child. We have sent out surveys to gauge parent interest and will assess parent needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Frequent observations through planned Danielson walk through. Teacher team meetings to compare student progress on a monthly basis with informal testing. Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In school year 2018-2019 parents will be engaged in several parent workshops and activities to build positive working relationships between school and families to foster an increase in parental involvement in their child's education. Parent coordinator will conduct informal surveys on parent needs and concerns to direct the workshop topics. According to the 2017-18 School Survey parent response rates at P25R were at 20% compared to a city average of 51%. The implementation of a new parent coordinator will focus on getting response rates increased. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase of parents at school functions including instructional workshops,family events and parent association meetings measured by attendance compared to previous year. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3a – Action Plan  The Principal will continue to meet with the PA Executive Board biweekly. Simultaneous translations will be available for Non-English speaking parents during all events/meetings The Parent Handbook, which will include a calendar of events, workshops, meetings will be distributed to all parents at the beginning of the school year. It will be available electronically and in paper copy. Periodic reminders will be sent home in the parents’ preferred language. . The PA Executive Board will conduct a needs assessment to prioritize topics and preferred times for workshops/courses. They will collaborate with community based organizations to increase the availability of resources. The PA will alternate monthly meetings between mornings and evenings in order provide parents with options and flexibility . Additional activities will be included to equip parents with strategies to support students at home and to promote family participation and, such as Family Fun Day, Family Game Nights, Family Field Trips, Career Day, For Parents by Parents Workshops, Parent and Child Workshops, Use of outside resources, etc. A “Class Parent” Program will be implemented to help facilitate ongoing communication with all parents. Continue to design strategies and activities for all content areas that support the development of strong Math skills utilizing a scaffold approach created by Go Math curriculum. These strategies will be applied throughout the year ● Collaborative teams within content areas. *Assistant Principal will supervise the work. ● P25R Math Teacher Learning Community ● Lead teachers ●Administration ● Students ● Inquiry Teams * LPP Administrators and teachers. Standardized students in grades 3-8. Students in A.I.S will have differentiated activities incorporated into Go Math lesson planning. Inter-visitation for teachers to turnkey Go Math strategies and participate in on-going Professional Development Teacher teams across all curriculum areas will meet weekly to discuss alignment to units of study. Solving Teachers will submit created activities to the Assistant Principal for review. This will be on going, based on the inquiry work. Activities completed by students will be checked daily as formative assessments but artifacts will be . collected and reviewed four times a year (November, January, April and June) to review with students (individual progress meetings) their Math portfolio and assess overall progress. This work will be measured monthly by area Assistant Principals. The creative programming. 2018-19 CEP 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Based Organizations P25r will be collaborating with are: Apple Bees, Notre Dame Club,Mount Loretta, Shoprite,Costco,United Cerebral Palsy, Seaview Rehab Hospital,Staten Island University Hospital, North & South AME Zion Church, P37r, New York State Park Service & South Shore Little League. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Translation Funding, District Parental Meetings, Program, Transportation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school expects a 1% increase from 9/16/18 to 2/26/19 in parent satisfaction concerning school culture and outreach. This will be evidenced by parent/ teacher meetings and informal surveys conducted by parent coordinator. All P25R sites have coordinated curriculum maps and teacher teams to monitor student learning and progress. We have achieved unification in math curriculum in all our sites. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New York City Parent Survey. Parent Coordinator professional development for parents. Parent Coordinator informal parent satisfaction survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Lexia Small Group Instruction Writers Revolution Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 & Level 2 Scantron Scores Level 1 & Level 2 Scantron Scores Level 1 & Level 2 Scantron Scores Social Studies Level 1 & Level 2 Scantron Scores Goals on students educational Individual Plans At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During Day During Day during day during day Goals on students IndividualEducation Plan Spectrum Math Lexia Lexia n/a Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Small Group instruction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 44  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 45   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75R025, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75R025 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 48  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 75R025, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 49  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve state standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Attend Parent Teacher conferences twice a year. Visit student schools during week of common planning time. Attend workshops that relate to their students needs.Visit schools website for updated communication. Follow through and 2018-19 CEP 51 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  help your children monitor their homework. Allow them opportunities such as Library to use programs that the school has purchased such as Lexia. Make sure students come to school on time and get proper sleep. Collaboration with parents/guardians, teachers/staff, and related service providers. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name 25R at South Richmond IS/HS Borough Staten Island School Number 02 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James McKeon Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Karen Enright Teacher/Subject Area Natalia Zamkovaia/S.S. Teacher/Subject Area Linda Rohrbacher Unit Coordina Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Anthony Casella Coach Jose Fernandez School Counselor Marc Blank Parent Christopher Litrell Parent Coordinator Michele Giacalone Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 596 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The "Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop" (TCRWP) is used on a regular basis to guide the students' progress in literacy. The English as a New Language ( ENL ) teacher maintains an on going portfolio of the students' writing pieces and analyzes them on a regular basis to look for growth as well as areas for instruction. In addition, the teacher also uses such f open-ended questions and student conferences and to get immediate feedback to evaluate the effectiveness of the lesson. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher shares the data gathered from the TCRWP and formative assessments with the student's classroom teacher and support personnel in an ongoing basis through both formal and informal meetings. This allows them to form immediate 2018-19 CEP 54  next steps to match instruction to the student's needs and help the school make informed decisions about curriculum, instruction, and professional development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The New York State English Language Arts (ELA) test, The New York State Math Test, Regents exams, report cards as well as ELL periodic assessments are all being used to identify baseline progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered are the following: 1- If it is determined that the student needs intervention the parent(s), or guardian (s) are notified in writing by the principal that the student will be receiving academic intervention services. The notice will be in English and translated, when needed, into the parent's native language. 2-The school has a tiered intervention plan, "Response to Intervention" ( RTI ) in place that is used in addition to the standards based instruction. This is designed to provide a different level of instruction for each student in grades K - 5 depending on their instructional and IEP needs. Students in grades 6 - 12 get support through Academic Intervention Services ( AIS ). Examples of interventions for grades K - 12 might include; a. Academic instructional services in more than one academic area can be combined. So that if a student is having trouble reading and also not doing well in science the student can get primary help in reading with secondary support in science content /skills. b - On the other hand if a student is meeting state standards but exhibits behavior problems or excessive absences then student support services in the form of a school counselor or social worker would be appropriate. 3-The school records the student's State test results to document the progress of students and to determine when progress warrants a student being discontinued from academic intervention services. In addition, quarterly progress reports are given to the parents in English or if needed translated to the parent's native language. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Grades K-5 students use the RTI plan which has three tiers. Tier 1 is universal/school wide instruction practices. In Tier 2 and Tier 3 students receive additional instructional support that is designed to meet their needs with increasing intensity. This can mean more time, smaller groups or individual instruction, or a greater focus on the specific areas which the student is experiencing difficulty. Grades 6- 12 students who require intervention use AIS which provides academic intervention instructional and/or student support differing again depending on the students' needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessment data is used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs: Math and ELA State Tests, Regents and the NYSESLAT scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 55  In order to make adjustments to our ELL programs, these findings are, disseminated formally at faculty meetings, support staff meetings, and grade conferences as well as informally when one teacher shares with another teacher during more casual meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We offer both the Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL programs. Students are grouped according to grade level, age, and English proficiency levels from the NYSESLAT, as well as behavior modification guidelines found in the student's Individualized Educational Program. As per CR Part 154.2, our state licensed and certified ENL teacher instructs our ELL students using the Stand-Alone ENL program to help our students develop English language skills to succeed in core content areas. Our ENL teacher also co-teaches using the Integrated ENL instruction to help build our English Language Learners ( ELLs ) English language skills through content area instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, our school does not offer a Transitional Bilingual Education program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, our school does not offer a Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ELL students receive 45 minutes per week for each student. This is the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our multi-sited school organization. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content in the ENL program is delivered in English, differentially to each student depending on the student's IEP goals. One approach is direct instruction using questioning, practice, and demonstrations. The student may ask and answer questions to demonstrate an understanding of a text, referring explicitly to the text as the basis for the answers. This is in alignment with the Common Core Learning Reading Standard for Literature Grade 3 - Key Ideas and Details # 1 Another method used is indirect instruction where the student observes, draws inferences and generates ideas for problem-solving. Through observation and inference skills the student may be able to make connections between, self, text, and the world around them. ( CCLS Grade 1 - Respond to Literature # 11 ) Interactive teaching, incorporating the Language Experience Approach ( LEA ) allows the students to strengthen their observational, listening, communication and interpersonal skills. Students may recount personal stories as well as fictional including fables and folktales from diverse cultures, and determine their central message, lesson, or moral. ( CCLS Reading 2018-19 CEP 56  Standards for Literature grade 2 - Key Ideas and Details #2 ) 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school ensures that our ELL students are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by asking school personnel fluent in the students' native languages to translate for our ELL students and if possible the school provides testing material for the ELL student in their native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction for each of the following Ell subgroups is developed by careful review of the student's strengths and weaknesses found in both formative, summative assessments as well as teacher and support personnel input. In this way, the student receives specialized support to build competencies in English as well as content areas. a. SIFE - Students are given very basic direct instruction, along with Total Physical Response and the Language Experience Approach with the focus on vocabulary. b. Newcomer - Students are given direct and indirect instruction with a strong focus on vocabulary and basic reading comprehension. c. Developing - Students receive direct and indirect instruction as well as interactive teaching with the focus on reading and writing. d. Long term - Students are given advanced indirect instruction to strengthen their reading and writing skills in their academic content areas. e. Former ELLs - Students receive academic support for up to two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The following are instructional strategies teachers of English Language Learner-Student With Disabilities ( ELL-SWDs ) use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development: Building back round knowledge; Close, interactive reading; Storytelling using wordless books; Role-playing and rehearsed oral performance ( Holiday assemblies ); Collaborative discussion and debate ( oral presentations ); intensive vocabulary instruction ( word families, building new words, words with multiple meanings and TPR Scaffolding ( graphic organizers ); Jointly constructed extended writing based on a shared classroom experience such as class trips. Our grade level materials include leveled library books, i Pads, grade level practice sheets, writing materials and the student's portfolio. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs who are also students with disabilities receive accommodations that apply both to ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable our ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by providing our ELLs with rigorous, effective instruction in small groups and one to one instruction based on each student's needs in alignment with the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 57  Flexibility is built into the program allowing the student to change the time of day or day itself if the student can not meet with he ENL teacher because of a scheduling conflict such as a school trip or assembly. The ENL teacher can switch time with another student or alter the teacher's schedule. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Academic Intervention Service (AIS) is offered in English to Newcomer ELLs, Developing ELLs, Long-term ELLs, students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE), ELLs with disabilities and former ELLs. It is designed to help students achieve the learning standards in English language arts and mathematics in grades K-12 and social studies and science in grades 4-12. These services include two components: Additional instruction that supplements the general curriculum ( regular classroom instruction): and/or student support services needed to address barriers to improved academic performance. The intensity of such services may vary and are designed to respond to the student needs as indicated through state assessment results, report cards, and IEP's. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school has begun the Writer's Revolution Program for the new school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, our school has not discontinued any programs/services for our ELL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our English Language Learners are afforded equal access to all school programs and activities. They are invited to participate in school projects, fairs, sporting events, shows, trips, and after school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Multi-sensory and multicultural ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of instruction. Literacy instruction for ELLs follows the NYC's Balanced Literacy Program which is supported by multicultural library books, the use of i-Pads, and the adaptation of literacy materials to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. Depending on the grade level and ability of the student, we use materials such as: The Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop and Writer's Revolution. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed by in our ENL program by reviewing The Home Language Survey and meeting with the child and parents. Support for the home language is delivered by the ENL teacher in English. School personnel, other than the ENL teacher, may in some cases be able to provide support to students during the school day in their home languages. Within our ENL program, the students' home language is taken into consideration when the ENL teacher is developing the students' lessons. The lessons may center around one of the students' cultural holidays or traditions. We do not currently have a DL or TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school ensures that all required services/resources support and correspond to our ELLs ages' and grade levels by careful review of CR Part 154: Commissioner's Regulations of New York State that govern education and services for ELLs and students with disabilities. Review of "The English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide" is also important because 2018-19 CEP 58  it details the implementation of CR Part 154. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Through frequent communication and a clear understanding of each others needs and goals we are able to ensure that all of the ELLs' needs are met. An example would be creating detailed schedules for the bus, gym, lunch room, and classroom use as well collaborating on The School Safety Plan. Also educating the respective student body and their families on the academic, linguistic and socio- emotional needs of the other group without violating their privacy. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school's ENL teacher, counselor, and parent coordinator assist ELLs in transitioning as newly enrolled students. We provide the students with services that include the buddy system, developing literacy in native language, providing a nurturing environment to facilitate language production and student orientation.The newly enrolled ELLs also have the advantage of Chapter 683 Summer Program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school offers a Spanish elective to all of our ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, our school only provides an ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our teachers and paraprofessionals who serve ELLs are supported in one way through the coaching services provided by District 75 Instructional coaches. In addition, we ensure the attendance of ENL, monolingual teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers at District and City-Wide Professional Development Workshops and conferences focusing on the education of ELLs. Upcoming professional development courses are, but not limited to the following: "ELL Compliance: Start of the Year" "The Multicultural and Multilingual Classroom" "Introduction to ENL Methodologies" "Designing Effective Classroom Assessments for ELLs with Disabilities" 2018-19 CEP 59  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school aims to meet the professional development requirements by incorporating ELL-specific professional development workshops into our conference days agenda as well as making time available for the required teachers to attend city and district-wide ELL workshops and conferences. The ENL teacher, classroom teachers, related service providers, as well as administrators, are provided with the opportunity to attend District 75 ELL Office instructional and compliance Professional Development Days. Attendance records and agendas are kept for all professional development activities. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? School personnel may meet individually with parents of our ELL students informally during prep time, or if need be by phone to discuss the goals of the ENL program, the ELLs language development progress, the ELLs NYSESLAT, English proficiency levels/results, and language development needs in all content areas. If a translator is needed the school will make every effort to obtain one. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Through our Parent Coordinator, we offer parents of ELLs ongoing information in their home languages if necessary and support on different aspects of their children's education such as; effective parent participation in-school activities, home activities to support learning, and information of upcoming conferences regarding ELLs. The parent coordinator may also provide information on a specific workshop sponsored by the Parents Association. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James McKeon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: South Richmond IS/HS School DBN: 75R025 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) James McKeon Title Principal Anthony Casella Assistant Principal Michele Giacalone Parent Coordinator Karen Enright ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Linda Rohrbacher Teacher/Subject Area Natalia Zamkovaia Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marc Blank School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75R025 School Name: Superintendent: M The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We identify our English Language Learners using the Home Language Identification Surveys, ATS Reports, and the students' IEPs within twenty days ot the students' entry into the New York City Department of Education. Home Language Identification Surveys are given to the parents by our licensed and certified ENL teacher. In conjunction with an interview with the parents, the results of the Home Language Identification Survey, and the results of the NYSITELL, the Language Proficiency Team (LPT) determines whether the student receives ENL or Bilingual services. We determine the language spoken and understood by the parents. The primary language is maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. A list of names of the parents who require language assistance services is then generated and given to the pupil personnel secretary, parent coordinator, and ENL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our 2015-2016 school year enrollment is 532 students. 11 of whom have been identified as English Language Learners. Their parents are provided with written and oral interpretation in Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates the following documents to the parents: Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities (September and New arrivals) Newsletters (Monthly) After-School Program information (October) Parent-Teacher Conference announcements (November and March) New York State exam dates (March and April) 2018-19 CEP 64  Daily student performance logs 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conferences (November and March) School Holiday Fair (December) School Autism Fair 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school provides parents who have been designated to be in need of language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their native or primary language. We also post, in our main office, a sign in covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for parents ensuring that they may reach the school’s administrative offices when in need. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services by providing parents with the parent survey and open lines of communication via conferences and telephone calls. 2018-19 CEP 66 
