2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R029 School Name: P.S. 029 BARDWELL Principal: LINDA MANFREDI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 29 353100010029 School Number (DBN): 31R029 Pre-Kindergarten – Fifth Grade 1581 Victory Boulevard, Staten Island, NY 10314 718-556-4400 Phone Number: 718-556-4429 Fax: Annmarie Vallebuona avalleb@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Linda Manfredi Juliane Cottone Lisa Acardi Johanna Longardino n/a n/a n/a n/a District Information VincenzaGallasio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10301 VGallasio@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-420-5657 Staten Island Fax: 718-420-5677 Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10301 KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8375 Phone Number: 718-391-6109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Johanna Longardino Laura Goffredo Lisa Acardi Denise Moley Toni Spinella Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mona Serhan Alexis Maniatis Christine Gambardella Christine Marrinan LisaKrulfeifer Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Public School 29 is to work together, learn together, and succeed together to develop and empower young minds to process the knowledge, skills and mindset to successfully display the values of courage, compassion and equity by paying it forward. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Bardwell Bengals pride themselves on being a “ Rare Breed .” PS29 is a school of the highest quality, providing a strong foundation of valuable learning experiences in a caring and nurturing environment. The Bengals strive for distinction in all areas. PS29 recognizes the importance of strong family and community ties . Our PTA is a main source of support for our school both financially and in the personal time they dedicate to our school community. We have partnerships with the YMCA, Staten Island Zoo, the Staten Island Foundation, the Jewish Community Center, the Cespino Russo Post of the American Legion, the Staten Island Advance, Little Kids Rock, Music and the Brain, New York 1, Meals on Wheels and other local food pantries. We also participate with the Local Justice/Court System, St. George Theater, local Karate and Dance schools and our neighboring Todt Hill Community Center where we participate in a wide variety of activities and events. We have a strong partnership with the local high schools, colleges and universities providing students with unique experiences and opportunities to broaden their education. We are always looking for new and unique ways to expand our students’ education by thinking out of the box and working with the community at large. Over the past several years we have prided ourselves on creating a supportive environment by establishing a school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers. Our “ Pay it Forward ” campaign has enhanced the spirit and pride within the school and the greater community, building on our mission to ” Work Together, Learn Together , Succeed Together ” for the benefit of everyone around us. Our students participate in a multitude of community outreach projects, connecting them to a variety of individuals and organizations throughout Staten Island. Through this community outreach, our smallest Bengals learn that they have the power to make a difference, learning how to help those in need and give thanks to those that help them. Our academies, BAM (K-1) and ABC (2-5) enhance our curriculum by providing students opportunities in the arts, broadcasting and community outreach. Our BAM students begin everyday with a healthy breakfast and discussion around healthy habits, as well as an introduction to music, technology and physical fitness. QuEST (Questioning ~ Understanding ~ Exploring through Science and Technology) is PS29’s adaptation of the Department of Educations’ program for the talented and gifted. It is a springboard of innovative ideas and a playground for creative minds. It is a program that offers authentic, purposeful and inspirational experiences for students in grades 2-5. This program continues to provide a supportive environment for those students who require a compacted curriculum and more advanced challenges than their grade-level peers. In order to encourage students to persevere, teachers are working to implement the the mathematical practice standards. Our focus is to encourage students to continue working through a task even though they may feel it is difficult. Students continue to develop a sense of resiliency and persistence, refusing to give up on the problem presented . This has led us to implement STEM/STEAM projects in each grade. In our planning we provide students with a challenging task to be worked on independently or in a group. Our teachers allow wait time for the students while giving timely and effective feedback to encourage them to persist in problem solving. The learning becomes about the process and not about the right answer. Teachers lead students with questions, but do not pick up a pencil. They guide the students in making headway in the task themselves. In short this encourages our students to understand the problem, find a way to attack it, and work until it is done! We believe that effective school leadership is what nurtures the professional growth of teachers and staff. Over the past three years, our school has partnered with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to provide our teachers with literacy support during on-site professional development days as well as calendar days at Columbia Teachers College. We use our dedicated professional development time to plan lessons, identify learning targets, align 2018-19 CEP 10  success criteria and ensure we are meeting the focus standards for our students. Teachers who attend workshops at Columbia take on a leadership role by turn-keying their learning to their peers. Teachers have also received professional development in Orton Gillingham and are implementing the strategies with great success. Our Orton teacher leaders continue to support their colleagues as they implement Orton Gillingham in their classrooms. Several of our paraprofessionals have attended a series of trainings in Reading Rescue at Columbia Teachers College and are implementing the program with select first grade students. Our goal is to continue to increase the number of trained paraprofessionals next year so that we can increase the number of students they service. At PS29 students are actively engaged in developing critical thinking skills in every classroom. Throughout our school, teachers are using a variety of assessment practices to inform instruction. Teachers are conferencing with students, using a variety of checklists and questioning, and are employing “E-Slips” (entry/exit slips) to gain a greater understanding of student strengths and weaknesses which ultimately may result in providing RTI services for small groups of students by trained paraprofessionals. In 2018-2019, we will focus our professional development around providing students with opportunities to participate in STEM/STEAM activities that will keep them engaged in meaningful, challenging learning experiences. Our teachers will allot time in their weekly schedule to front-load students' knowledge, expose students to related activities, and then immerse students in a project that will challenge them to use trial and error to meet with success. Our students will learn that "failure can be good...as long as you learn from it!" 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our ENL students make up 6% of our population with 3 entering, 15 emerging, 7 transitioning, 20 expanding and 6 commanding. Our special education students make up 20% of our school, with 5% learning in self-contained settings. These students require strong support in phonics and phonemic awareness skills. In order to address this deficiency several of our teachers have been trained in the Orton Gillingham approach and are implementing it in their classrooms and with small groups of students. In order to address an increase in students' behavioral needs, more than 20% of our staff has been trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCIS) and we will continue to train our staff until we have 100% participation. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year we continued our focus around the Framework of Great Schools element, Rigorous Instruction. Our teachers worked collaboratively to create solid learning targets and success criteria for their lessons in order to focus their instruction and provide students with expectations for their work. In 2018-2019 we will use our past work on Framework of Great Schools element, Rigorous Instruction and include the element of Collaborative Teachers to solidify our STEM/STEAM knowledge base and to develop projects that will push our students further than we have in the past. We will work from the viewpoint that "failure is good as long as you learn from it" and we will encourage students to persist through these projects while developing an appreciation for real world problems and solutions. Our teachers will collaborate during Impact Team meetings to identify students strengths and weaknesses and to learn new instructional methods to address them. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R029 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 644 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 46 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 27 6 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 52.0% % Attendance Rate 46.1% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 21.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 49.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 55 55 27 94.2% 6.4% 18.9% 7.9% 18.2% 3.1% 4 2% 8 49.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the following sources of data provided our needs assessment: Elementary School Quality Snapshot, the School Quality Guide, Danielson Teacher Evaluations and our most recent Quality Review and Teacher and Parent Learning Environment Surveys and Classroom walkthroughs. * Students in grades K-2 are beginning to participate in STEM based projects * Parents are volunteering to assist students and teachers in classroom based STEM projects * Teachers are targeting their feedback to help students improve their work * 62.3% of students are performing at or above a level 3 on the NYS ELA assessment * 50% of students are performing at or above a level 3 on the NYS Math assessment * This year we would like to increase student engagement in hands-on activities and exploratory learning with students expected to explain their thinking both verbally and in writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of classroom teachers collaboratively planning standards based, Next Generation lessons for STEM, 100% of students will engage in hands-on inquiry and open ended exploration as measured by standards based success criteria, rubrics and checklists. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Utilize EnVision 2.0 Math to target instruction based on students needs and data trends  Create and administer common and standardized All Teachers/ Paraprofessionals formative assessments  Performance tasks to measure student performance  Provide students with success criteria to self-assess their learning and set goals.  Provide students with disabilities and English Language Learners with supports such as questions read aloud, manipulatives, scaffolded success criteria and extended time. Using Next Generation Standards and EnVision Math 2.0 Units of Study, teachers will plan STEM activities to complement student learning All Teachers/ Paraprofessionals * Schedule times for students to conference with teachers and peers to discuss their learning and set goals in math. Teachers Students Paraprofessionals September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 Quarterly At the end of each unit Daily September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 Every 6-7 weeks throughout school year Beginning 9/5/2018 Administration Grade Leaders Classroom Teachers Administration Grade LeadersClassroom Teachers Administration Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers * Schedule STEM monthly projects in classrooms and parent volunteers to share student learning and explain their goals in math. Teachers Monthly Administration Students 9/15/18 - 6/26/19 Parent Coordinator Paraprofessionals Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 14  Provide professional development in creating STEM projects reflective of the Next Generation Standards Administration Classroom Teachers Parents Admin Teachers Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will request parent volunteers to assist in classrooms each month during STEM projects. Parents will be asked to donate supplies as well as offer their expertise in assisting on a variety of projects. Teachers will utilize Remind 101 to keep parents apprised of donation requests and volunteer dates. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  EnVisions Math 2.0  Curriculum Maps  Common Formative Assessments and Performance Tasks  Rigorous Lesson Plans   Next Generation Standards Success Criteria (Math, Rubrics) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 75% of students in grades K-5 will use checklists, rubrics and success criteria to evaluate and explain their work during STEM. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will provide students with success criteria and standards based rubrics to evaluate their progress and will ensure that 100% of students have had opportunities to engage in STEM activities as measured by their completion of the activities and their verbal/written explanation. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of the following sources of data provided our needs assessment: Elementary School Quality Snapshot, the School Quality Guide, Danielson Teacher Evaluations and our most recent Quality Review and Teacher and Parent Learning Environment Surveys and classroom walkthroughs Students in grades 1-5 are setting individual student goals in literacy or mat Students are using success criteria to set their learning goals    Teachers are targeting their feedback to students based on success criteria  62.3% of students are performing at or above a level 3 on the NYS ELA assessment  50% of students are performing at or above a level 3 on the NYS Math assessment  At-risk students are being identified based on a set criteria in ELA  As we continue to support our students in making academic growth, our RTI structure allows these students to make sure they are known well by at least one adult at school while getting the support they need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers identifying at-risk students based on a set criteria in ELA, at least 15% of at-risk students who receive Response to Intervention in ELA provided by trained staff or special education teachers, will make enough progress to be removed from RTI and remain in the general education classroom. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). * Paraprofessionals will received training from Teachers College staff in Reading Rescue Paraprofessionals in K-2 DATES TBA Adminstration * Special Education teachers' programs will provide for at least one period each day to engage in RTI instruction. Special Education Teachers 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 * Paraprofessionals will meet with identified students in grades K-2 to provide support to identified students using the Reading Rescue program. Paraprofessionals 10/1/18 - 6/26/19 K-2 At Risk Students Special Education Teachers 10/1/18 - 6/26/19 * Special Education teachers will meet with identified students to provide support in ELA using targeted reading and writing strategies and Orton Gillingham in small groups. At Risk Students Teachers College Staff Developer Adminstration Special Education Teachers Administration Teachers College Staff Developer Paraprofessionals Administration Special Education Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will provide identified students with Pupil Intervention Plans created together with families during a meeting with the teacher, beginning October 15, 2018 and continuing every six to eight weeks throughout the school year. Teachers will discuss students strengths and weaknesses in order to help parents support their students at 2018-19 CEP 18  home. Administration will create a parent contact calendar to ensure that teachers are in continuous contact with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study  Reading Rescue Program and materials  Orton Gillingham program materials and training  Guided Reading Materials  Curriculum Maps  Common Formative Assessments and Performance Tasks  Rigorous Lesson Plans  Success Criteria (Writing Rubrics and Reading Progressions) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 8% of identified students will have made enough progress to be removed from RTI services and remain in the general education setting for the entire school day, as measured by Teachers College Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure that at least 15% of identified students will make enough progress to be removed from RTI will be the Teachers College Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the following sources of data provided our needs assessment: Elementary School Quality Snapshot, the School Quality Guide, Danielson Teacher Evaluations and our most recent Quality Review and Teacher and Parent Learning Environment Surveys.  Teachers work collaboratively to revise and enhance curricula, improve practice, create rigorous projects that promote student choice, conduct inquiry, and strengthen their ability to provide meaningful feedback to students (PPO 4/2017)  Continue to allow teachers multiple opportunities to further their curriculum, pedagogical skill and content knowledge by meeting in these structured teams (PPO 10/2017)  Continue to allow students time to self and peer assess their own work and share their thinking (PPO 10/2017)  Continue to enhance instructional strategies that provide multiple entry points in lessons to engage students in challenging tasks. For example, the purposeful incorporation of STEAM into all grades has assured that student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student ownership, thinking and participation (PPO 4/2018) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teacher teams collaborative efforts focusing on STEM instruction, 100% of classrooms will implement monthly STEM lessons reflective of the Next Generation standards as measured by classrooms observations and student work samples. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● During extended hours, teachers will collaborate with their grade to incorporate the STEM approach within the EnVision Units of Study and/or the Science curriculum. All teachers/ paraprofessionals ● Engage in professional development looking at student work and planning instruction with a focus on STEM All teachers/ paraprofessionals ● Continued refinement of performance tasks with standards based success criteria to ensure students are aware of expectations. All teachers/ paraprofessionals Create a Google Drive library of STEM activities to share with teachers throughout different grade levels. All Teachers Administration September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 Administration PD Team Grade Leaders FSC September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 Parent Coordinator TC staff developers Administration PD Team Grade Leaders BFSC Parent Coordinator Administration PD Team Grade Leaders BFSC Parent Coordinator Administration PD Team September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 2018-19 CEP 21  Grade Leaders Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will invite parents in to their classrooms to assist in implementing STEM lessons each month. Teachers will send home lists of supplies that will help them in their lessons. Teachers will utilize Remind 101 to keep parents apprised of STEM dates and needed materials. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Protocols for teacher team work * Common Core Companion Resource Texts ● Common Rubrics for Common Assessments ● Collection of student work and data ● Refinement of units of study and lesson plans * Google Drive STEM library Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of teachers will implement monthly STEM lessons reflective of the Next Generation standards and resulting from a collaboration of teacher teams, as evidenced by classroom observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This goal will be measured by classroom observations and at least 75% effective ratings in Domain 3C. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the following sources of data provided our needs assessment: Elementary School Quality Snapshot, the School Quality Guide, Danielson Teacher Evaluations and our most recent Quality Review and Teacher and Parent Learning Environment Surveys.  Teacher Survey - Indicates the need for more support in using Google Drive to share lessons and other documents  Teacher Survey - indicates teachers need to have a single location to find/save lesson plans and idea  Teacher Survey - Indicates additional support is needed to assist teachers in effectively using Google Drive  Teachers need to increase their content knowledge and build resources for teaching strategies, lesson plans and assessments. Having a central location for shared plans and data will help teachers in selecting resources and ideas for their lessons. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of at least 1 staff member on every grade being trained in Google Suite, 100% of teachers will have support in Google Suite to further increase overall communication among all staff members, as measured by an increased collection of shared lesson plans, data and scheduling. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Trained staff will meet with grade level colleagues during professional development time to collaborate on lesson planning, sharing and editing in google docs, notes and artifacts in docs, sheets and slides. All staff will share pertinent schedules in google calendar and will be responsible to meeting scheduled deadlines. n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Administration, Support Staff All Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Administration, Support Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Google Trained Staff, Teachers, Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Google Trained Staff, Teachers, Administration n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year, the Parent coordinator will create a google calendar specific to families to share school wide events and activities. Teachers will create calendars for families for classroom specific events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Google Suite  District Support Personnel  Trained staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of teachers will be able to create a calendar, access Google drive, share and edit documents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Team agendas, notes and document compilations in Google docs will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the following sources of data provided our needs assessment: Elementary School Quality Snapshot, the School Quality Guide, Danielson Teacher Evaluations and our most recent Quality Review, classroom walkthroughs and informal student conferences.  Our Learning Environment Survey shows that 99% of families feel they are engaged as partners in their child's education and we need to continue this trend.  Our School Quality Guide shows that 99% of parents and teachers are satisfied with outreach from the school and we need to continue this trend  Our parent survey shows that parents are interested in being involved with their child's community service  Our parent survey shows that parents are eager to share their expertise with the children to assist in making them College and Career Ready.  Although we have strong family involvement, the need to keep students and their families engaged in our community is very important to PS29. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, at least 30% of students and their families will attend opportunities to be involved in community/in-school collaborations to enrich the civic life of our students. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? * Teachers will invite parents, a minimum of three times during the year, to engage with students in the areas such as the arts, author celebrations, math/stem challenges, and career engagement days. All Staff and students September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 Administration Teachers/Paras Students Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers/Paras Students Parent coordinator Administration Teachers/Paras Students Parents Parent coordinator Parent Coordinator * Parent coordinator will send phone blasts and update school website throughout the school year to keep families abreast of upcoming school and community events. All Staff and students weekly September 2018 - June 2019 * Parent coordinator will work with community groups to arrange opportunities for students to participate in community service with their organization. All Staff and students Parents September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 * Parent coordinator will compile a list of events that students can participate in for community service, and will add new opportunities as they become available. Parent Coordinator parents Teachers Students September 5, 2018 -June 26, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Our school partners with several local community organizations including the YMCA, Meals on Wheels, the Jewish Community Center, New York 1, the Staten Island Zoo and surrounding high schools and colleges and many others. We continuously seek new partnerships to expose our students to the opportunities the Staten Island community offers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent volunteers  Teacher volunteers  Materials required for special events (copies, laptop, projector, elmo)  Various Community Organizations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 at least 15% of students and their families will attend opportunities to be involved in community/in-school collaborations that enrich the civic life of our students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance lists will be kept at all events to measure the number of students and their families who attend. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Before School Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) ELA State Test TCRWP Orton Gillingham Common Formative assessments/performance tasks Mathematics Math State Test Reading Rescue RISE Morning Program EnVisions2.0 Common Formative assessments/performance tasks Intervention Engage NY Guided Math RISE Morning Program Guided Reading RISE Morning Program Guided Reading RISE Morning Program Science Social Studies Common Formative assessments/performance tasks Common Formative assessments/performance tasks Small Group During school day Before School During school day Small Group Before School During School Day Small Group Before School 2018-19 CEP 30 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance Peer Mediation Small Group During School Day Suspensions Counseling Individual Behavior plans 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32 Students may receive school supplies such as back packs, notebooks, pencils, folders, etc. We will also use this funding to send students on school trips. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $5,450 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 29, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 29 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 29, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Recent data analysis that shows our ENL students are reading below grade level. Teachers College Reading Levels show that in September 2018, 27 of the 39 tested ELLs are reading below or barely on reading level. NYSESLAT consistently show a marked weakness in writing. PS 29 will implement an afternoon ENL Supplemental Program starting December 3, 2018. We will serve all ENL students in grades K-5. The three certified ENL teachers will each instruct a grade band (k-1, 2-3, 4-5) during the supplemental program. The language of instruction will be English. The groups will meet two times a week for one hour and a half (2:30-4:00) through March 28, 2019 for a total of 28 sessions. Notification letters for the program will be distributed in the parent's preferred language as per the RPAL report. Teacher will take daily attendance and make phone calls home when students do not attend. Records will be kept on attendance and filed for record keeping. The teachers will be working on non-fiction social studies topics. Topics will be selected from the Passport to Social Studies curriculum/Scope and Sequence . The students will get to work in small groups to discuss ideas, watch videos, read, and research their topic. Students will have the opportunity to create travel brochures, power point presentations, make display boards, and conduct peer interviews in which the students will role play reporters. Focus will be placed on the four modalities, Listening, Reading, Speaking, and Writing. As a culminating activity, students will record themselves on a video slide show using Screencastify. The slide show will showcase and incorporate all they have learned on their selected topic. These activities will help our ENL students enhance their speaking, listening, reading and writing skills through fun interactive activities. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development plan for the Title III Program will include the two certified ENL teachers (Jayme Smith and Christine Gambardella) to plan collaboratively for informative, resourceful professional development sessions throughout the school year. The topics that the ENL teachers will be focusing are as follows along with dates of the 17 sessions: 1. Math Scaffolding Instruction in Elementary Mathematics for ELL students. 4/18/19 2. Stages of Language Acquisition of ELL students. 5/2/19 3. Reviewing/understanding the listening and speaking components of the NYSESLAT 5/3/19 4. Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol Model 5/9/19 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development 5. Creating Language Objectives for our Content Based Lessons 5/10/19 6. Supporting ELL students with Language Goals Through Shared Reading and Interactive Writing 5/16/19 7. Research-Based Practices to Increase ELL Student Achievement 5/17/19 8. Challenges for ELL students in Content Learning and Sharing in Ideas to Overcome These Challenges 5/23/19 9. Teaching Strategies for Classroom Teachers of ELL Students 5/24/19 10. Cultural Awareness- In order to maximize achievement opportunities for ELL students, educators will understand students different cultural backgrounds. 5/30/19 11. Scaffolding Writing for the ELL students and Demystifying Figurative Expressions 5/31/19 12. Exposure to Demonstration-Showing Why Increasing Academic Achievement of ELL Students is Dependent Upon Multiple Instructional Approaches or Methodologies. 6/6/19 13. Universal Design for Learning (UDL) 6/7/19 14. Assist teachers/train teachers in parental engagement of ELL students. 6/13/19 15. Creating foldables and manipulatives to increase ELL student vocabulary. 6/14/19 16. Content Carousel-Teachers will rotate from each content area sharing ideas to increase vocabulary development. 6/20/19-6/21/19 Records of the PD sessions are maintained in a file, which include daily attendance sheets and the agenda of the meeting. The ENL teachers attend PD workshops throughout the school year and summer to enhance their knowledge and deepen their understanding of language development, technology, and teaching strategies for ENL students. As stated in section B, we have identified reading and writing as a focus for our students to improve upon. We planned our topics for the PD sessions based upon these needs, as well as the subjects the classroom teachers requested more support to help plan their instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to a series of sessions to explain how to help their child become a successful English Language Learner. They will work collaboratively with students and teachers to learn how to assist their child with homework, reading, and writing. These sessions will provide the parents with the necessary tools to help their children at home. Parent engagement sessions will also be held to introduce the parents to online subscription services that the school holds licenses for and are already utilized by the students. The sessions will be provided by the two certified ENL teachers. Parents will be notified by written correspondence in their native language. We are planning for three two-hour sessions to complete the parent engagement portion. At the parent engagement sessions, we plan to have a Chinese interpreter present to help with information and parent communication. Notification of these events will be sent home in their preferred language as stated in RAPL report. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities We are planning on holding these parent engagement workshops on January 16, 2019 from 4:00 pm -6:00 pm, February 27, 2019 from 4:00 pm-6:00 pm and April 17, 2019 from 4:00 pm -6:00 pm. We will display student work, have student presentations, and a Q/A session to address any concerns. Parents will be contacted in their preferred language as listed in the RAPL. We will keep a file labeled Parent Engagement Activities, which will include the agenda, attendance sheets, and the parent invitations in their preferred languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 7411.50 per session 976 per session 1220 per session Purchased services  High quality staff n/a and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 758.90 512.58 1200 n/a 736 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 27sessions of after school program per teacher (3 teachers) 121.5 hours X 61 =7411.50 Three 2-hour parent engagement sessions plus one planning hour for each (2 teachers = 16 hours X 61) 10 teacher planning sessions( 20 hours X 61) n/a NY TeAM KIT 3-5 KIt $379.95 1 Extra 5th grade books 79.95 add on 20-pack Student Books 2nd grade 299.00 Supplies for activities: index cards, markers, display boards, paper, glue sticks, scissors, puppets for primary presentations, letters for display boards, post-its, folders RazKids Complete, including Raz for ELLs, Writing A-Z, Vocabulary A-Z and Science A-z n/a 2 chromebooks @ $368 = 736 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Bardwell School Borough Staten Island School Number 029 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Linda Manfredi Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laurie Rinaldo Teacher/Subject Area Joanie LaMonaca Teacher/Subject Area Tara Mccarthy Related-Service Provider Lori Rodriguez Superintendent Assistant Principal A. Vallebuona/J. Longardino Coach type here School Counselor Nicole Gavaris Parent ToniAnn Spinella Parent Coordinator Jennifer Pagano Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Christine Gambardella ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 643 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 52 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 29 has continued with Teacher’s College Reading Assessment for the 2017-2018 school year. We have also had our ELL teachers and K-2 teachers trained in Orton Gillingham.This focuses on the letter and sound recognition, which has been an area of concern for our ELL students.It is a step-by-step approach to how children learn language, thus making it a great tool for our ELL students.Decoding skills, spelling and vocabulary are all components of the approach.The classroom teachers incorporate it, as well as the ELL teachers during their mandated times.The Teacher's College Reading Assessments also use letter and sound recognition, concepts of print, sight word lists and running records to gain a complete profile of each students' reading abilities .Our primary ELLs struggle with letter/sound recognition, while our upper grade ELLs are having difficulty with comprehension.This information is shared with the ENL teachers, who often assists in the completion of the TC assessments. She is able to work with the students in their areas of need during their mandated times. We are confident that with Fundations, the Teacher’s College balanced literacy program, and Orton Gillingham we will see an improvement in 2018-19 CEP 50  benchmark levels for our ELLs. Last year 28% of our ELLs met the benchmark in reading. We are hoping that with the above mentioned practices put into place to see a minimum of 60% of ELLs reach their grade appropriate benchmark. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that we have in place to support these efforts to guide the instruction of our ELL are as follows:We have had developers from Teachers College that visit with our teachers monthly in cycles of 3 weeks, as well as a June planning during our Professional Development days. These sessions include a developer coming to meet with our teachers and administration to discuss the learning targets, focus of the lesson, goals of the individual students, as well as the results of ongoing assessments. The teachers and developers can share ideas, discuss the progress of the students in each unit of study, and set goals for the units that are all standards based. We also have our teachers share with School Leadership, Mrs. Manfredi, Mrs. Longardino, and Mrs. Vallebuona the ideas, goals, findings, topics, and concerns we have specifically focusing on the ENL students. These findings will help guide our instruction. Discussing with the School Leadership gives us an opportunity to get insight and then apply that to our ideas and make changes as necessary. Mrs. Vallebuona works closely with the Literacy team and Mrs. Longardino with the Math Team. Our three certified ENL teachers meet for Impact to discuss needs, patterns, and trends among the ENL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 29 uses the Fall and Spring ELA Benchmark and the ELL Periodic to assess the progress and areas of need of our ELL students. As well as teacher baselines that are done with each Teachers College Unit. These baselines are done for reading with include passages and comprehension questions, as well as a writing baseline that is focused on the topic of each specific unit. Our teachers meet with student work during Impact Team meetings to discuss patterns and trends in our students Math assessments. The team is able to analyze specific students including our ENL students, and see areas of concern as well as success. Next, the teachers are able to adjust/modify their lesson plans, the delivery of the lesson, materials and resources used, and the assessments to reach success by all the students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In October an at-risk letter goes home to all students that are not performing well in on grade level standards in Mathematic, Reading and Writing, as well as socially and emotionally. The parents are then called or given an appointment, using the Translation Line and Google Translate to meet with the teachers to discuss a plan. Once the data has been gathered and analyzed, the students are then identified as students that need a Pupil Intervention Plan (PIP.) This involves the classroom teacher meeting with the Ell teacher and writing goals for the areas of improvement in reading, writing, speaking, listening and math. The areas of need are based on the student progress and vary from student to student. The next step involves goals being made for what each student can work on for the next cycle, which are usually 6 weeks. After the teachers have collaborated to make this PIP, next they meet with the parents to discuss the goals and progress for each student. A staff member is used to translate or we use the Language Line that is offered through the DOE. The NYSESLAT Items skills analysis is reviewed with the ENL teachers, classroom teachers and impact teams to analyze trends and areas that need improvement. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our ELL students have shown the need for improvement in speaking and oral language as assessed by the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Our ENL teachers and classroom teachers both have found that there is a need to focus on academic vocabulary, speaking and listening activities. As part of the integrated ENL services, the students in small groups participate in discussions and team talks, all based from the Unit of Study that is being taught from the Teacher's College Reading and Writing program. Word Walls, language frames, and role-playing are all part the instruction used to help the struggling ELL students. According to the RTI Guide for teachers of ELLs: Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 2018-19 CEP 51  instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. At P.S. 29 we follow these guidelines to ensure our ENL students needs and areas of weaknesses are being met and that we can have them meet NYS standards. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs are the New York State ELA, Math, and NYSELAT. Our current 4th graders performed low with scores of 1’s on the ELA from 2016. Our ELL teachers focus for improvement will be on building vocabulary, using context clues to help understand unknown words, chunking the story to build comprehension and help the students to stop and think about what they just read. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? P.S. 29 has grade meetings with the classroom and ELL teachers where the data is analyzed and adjustments are made to the programs.For example, the commanding level receives 90 minutes of services after the scores from NYSESLAT reach the commanding level. Areas of strengths and weaknesses are then identified and used as our learning targets for lessons that are planned collaboratively. We will hold professional developments with the teaching staff and paraprofessionals, that focus on the components of the NYSESLAT. Examples of the listening, speaking, reading, and writing sections will be shown to the teachers as well. The parts of the exams and expectations of the students are explained. This gives the classroom teacher a chance to see how their lessons can help the ENL students perform with greater success on the NYSESLAT. Our school leaders, Linda Manfredi, AnnMarie Vallebuona, and Johanna Longardino use the results from the NYSED state exams with the classroom and ENL teachers to focus small group instruction. The areas of weakness and strengths are analyzed. After, this has been discussed lessons are planned with a clearer focus. Teachers are able to collaborate to plan together the ENL and classroom teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. .P.S. 29 has a freestanding ENL program.We have two types of instruction. A students proficiency level is determined by the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. The standalone ENL serves students that are required by the NYS mandates and allows for them to acquire English Language skills so they can succeed in the content areas.This is provided by the ELL teacher in small groups. The students that require freestanding, meet with the teacher that services them and focuses on language goals specific to the students needs. The results of the NYSESLAT help drive the instruction. Lessons are planned that involve listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. The integrated ENL helps build upon their skills in the content areas.This is provided by the classroom teacher and the ELL teacher.The students are grouped according to their NYSELAT levels, depending on the number of ELL students on a specific grade, we place the students with peers of the same grade level. PS 29 will follow the New York State ESL mandates where Beginner/Entering ELLs will receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. (180 minutes Standalone, 180 minutes Integrated) Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs will receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (90 minute standalone, 180 Integrated, 90 flexible).Intermediate/Transitioning ELLs will receive 180 minutes of instruction per 2018-19 CEP 52  week (90 minutes integrated, 90 minutes flexible).Advanced/Expanding ELLs will receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (180 integrated).Students who have passed the NYSESLAT and are deemed at the Proficient/Commanding level will continue to receive a minimum of 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week for two years after a proficient level has been attained. During content instruction such as Science and Social Studies, the ENL teacher will incorporate home language support through technology, picture dictionaries, and videos. Our ENL students are grouped according to grade and level given to us from the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Our classes are programmed with the ENL students in the same class across a grade. This allows the ENL teacher to meet on common preparation periods with the classroom teachers to plan and discuss the ENL students. It also allows for the ENL teacher to collaboratively teach with the classroom teacher and have a daily interaction with the teacher to modify any changes in lesson planning and delivery. Our grades 3-5 have a departmental program. They have an ELA teacher, a MAthematics/Social Studies teacher, as well as a Science teacher. The ENL teacher is integrating into all of these classes for the ENL support depending onthe students individual levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 29 does not have a Transitional Bilingual Education Program c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 29 does not have a Dual Language Program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? SIFE P.S. 29 does not currently have any SIFE students in attendance. However, a SIFE student, like all our students, would be offered all the P.S. 29 has to offer. We would make sure that they felt safe and show them how caring and personable our staff is in and out of the classroom. Our goal is to offer a safe, positive, caring, learning environment. Our first step would be to assess the student using the ELL identification process. We then would administer the Home Language Identification Survey to the parents that are registering their child to P.S. 29. If it is stated in Part 2 of the Home Language Survey that the student has had an interruption in their schooling, the next step is to NYSED Oral Interview Questionnaire. This will allow us to collect information about the student, their family and background. Also, their education history and practices. The next step is to give the students the NYSED Multiilingual Literacy SIFE screener or MLS. It will determine the literacy level of the student. After it is administered there is a writing screener as well that can help determine their writing skills and level. The screener is available in multiple languages: Arabic, Bengali, Chinese simplified and Traditional, English, Haitian Creole,Karen, Maay Maay, Urdu and Spanish. After the students are identified as SIFE, the next step is the identify the student in the Department of Educations BNDC, within 30 days. There is one year to make modifications. The student will be supported with Bilingual Staff, parent meetings that will keep the parents informed on academic and social development. This also gives the school community an update on the students home life and experiences. The SIFE student will have both standalone and integrated instruction with their peer classmates. Our ENL teachers Laurie Rinaldo, Christine Gambardella and Jayme Smith will support the student in all aspects of their P.S. 29 education. Our teachers and staff are trained through Professional Development on SIFE students and given information to help these students succeed. We have outlined the number of minutes for each proficiency level in the question above (number 1.)PS 29 will follow the New York State ESL mandates where Beginner/Entering ELLs will receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. (180 minutes Standalone, 180 minutes Integrated.) Our teachers are trained in Orton Gillingham which focuses on sound recognition and has specific rules for spelling, which have shown positive results in our ENL students and beginning readers. Reading Recovery is another program used to help advance these students. Our classroom and ENL teachers use scaffolding lessons to support the students in this beginning phase. We have computer programs and ipads to help them in the classroom. Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs will receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (90 minute standalone, 180 Integrated, 90 flexible).Intermediate/Transitioning ELLs will receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes integrated, 90 minutes flexible). With the students that are presently at this level we are focusing on vocabulary in the content areas, Latin root 2018-19 CEP 53  words, prefixes and suffixes, and strategies to use context clues to find the meaning. The students are progress is checked throughout the year with benchmarks, running records, informal and formal assessments. Advanced/Expanding ELLs will receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (180 integrated). Students who have passed the NYSESLAT and are deemed at the Proficient/Commanding level will continue to receive a minimum of 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week for two years after a proficient level has been attained. They will also receive RTI, AIS (if needed), testing accommodations, and ENL strategies and supports in their classrooms. The testing accommodations such as small group separate location and/or bilingual glossaries for NYS exams could be offered to the commanding student. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The core content is delivered throughout the ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies curriculum on all grade levels. Specifically, through the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing program our teachers plan the units of study that focus on cross-cultural literature, social studies content, as well as informational text that are non-fiction and science based.These units are made up of academic vocabulary, picture cards/dictionaries, videos and virtual tours, and classrooms of leveled libraries in bilingual, fiction and non-fiction, some native languages, and hands on teaching kits.Through our professional developments the teachers have had training on how to incorporate the ELL approaches and learning strategies. The teachers plan scaffolding lessons to offer support to the students at their individual levels. There are multiple entry points and technology to support as well. The classrooms have Smart Board technology, laptops, and laptops. Our ENL teachers have attended the SIOP workshops over the summer to have more experience in planning and supporting our ENL students. The language objectives and activities they learned, shared, and discussed throughout professional development, is in turn being passed on the the classroom teachers. This will enable the teachers to have a common understand as they co-teach in the integrated portion of the ENL program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P.S. 29 does not currently have any students who are eligible for ELE or Chinese Reading Test. If we did, they would be supported throughout the year. We use the Spanish Lab, Staff that speak the home languages of the students, and the Language Line to help ensure that ELL students are evaluated in their home language throughout the school year. We have given the staff the language survey as well to ensure we are using all resources available to our school community. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups as follows: SIFE- PS 29 does not have any SIFE students.If we did have SIFE students we would welcome them and create a comfortable learning experience.They would be assessed using the questionnaire and the LENS if they are in grade 3 or higher.The SIFE student would receive small group instruction with children on his or her proficiency level. We would hope that there be at least one student in the class that will speak his or her native language to ease the child into a new system of learning and make the student comfortable and open to learning and sharing their experiences.In addition, we would keep in contact with the parents to discuss the needs of the child, as well as, provide native language support through the purchase of literature in their native language to assist them in their native language skills. Building upon the content subjects in their native language if possible would be beneficial. Also phonics, fluency, vocabulary, comprehension will all be focused on in the classroom with the classroom and ENL teachers. The SIOP model of planning and teaching starts with the concrete ideas and gradually builds to the abstract helps benefit the SIFE students. The goal is to build these students to become independent learners and Reaching out to community resources available will also help these students. The NYC public and the YMCA are community 2018-19 CEP 54  resources that offer free programs to support these students as well. The NYSED website has numerous resources that offer strategies, webinars, websites, and lesson ideas to support these students in and outside the classroom. Newcomer- Newcomers are taught to draw from their first language using books written in their native language, children draw pictures or write short statements in English to support their understanding.The use of technology, virtual video tours, interactive computer programs, songs, poetry, and readers theater will all aide in the student’s learning of English.If possible translations in their home language will be purchased or borrowed to accommodate the student.Bilingual dictionaries are available to help more advanced students in skill building, classroom vocabulary and on assessments.The ENL teacher and the individual student can engage in conversation, most specifically with the intermediate students, to provide opportunities for corrective feedback and to help build language awareness and meta-linguistic skills. Developing- Students who are in the Emerging and Transitioning proficiency groups are taught to build on what they have learned to improve their English language acquisition.These students are instructed within small groups, often with students that can help in their development of the language.Their lessons are hands on, which help them build their vocabulary.Working closely with their peers helps build their confidence and fluency in the language. 4. Long Term-Students that have received ELL services for 4-6 years that have been assessed by the LAB-R or NYSELAT are considered long-term. The goal of these students is to increase vocabulary and expressive language through the use of manipulatives, interactive learning, drama, song, poetry, pictures, art, and writing. Using scaffolding will help them improve their writing and focus on the steps of the writing process will guide them to work and succeed independently. 5. Former ELLS-The students that have reached the commanding level receive 90 minutes per week of ENL services for two years as a support.Our students are in the classroom with current ELL students.When integrated ENL services are provided, the two ENL teachers service the former ENL students throughout the grade levels.Mrs. Gambardella services grades 3-5 and Mrs. Rinaldo grades K-2.These students are provided with transitional support. Former ENL students have extended time on all classroom and state assessments.The students work collaboratively together to build upon their language skills and provide opportunities for the less competent students to thrive.We also offer Academic Instructional Services.The students are evaluated on quarterly bas 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our current ELL-SWD population consists of 8 students in a self-contained classroom, 5 in ICT, and one who receive speech and one that OT and speech services.Our instruction follows the students IEP goals, and our teachers use ENL strategies that focus on the needs of each individual student.The classroom teachers, service providers, and ENL teachers all collaborate to help these students meet their goals.Each child’s IEP is examined, so that the needs can be determined.Certain adaptations need to be made for each child.The materials used are then selected, modified if necessary, and presented accordingly.The students that have been identified as Learning Disabled on their IEP’s we directions and questions read slowly.Our activities may have fewer questions or problems, so we can provide them with assistance and feedback on their progress.The students that have been classified as Speech Impaired, we use songs, poetry, videos, and visual aides to help build on vocabulary. Students that face challenges in reading in English often need help with the sentence structure and syntax. The unfamiliarity with the connotative and denotative meaning of words, grammar usage and the abundance of idioms and figurative language in English text. These challenges are part of the lessons, rituals and routines, and activities planned for the ENL students in ELA lessons. Our teachers are trained in Orton Gillingham and Reading Rescue programs as well to help our students with disabilities. As mentioned several times the SIOP model is effective in helping students in the content areas. Clear language objectives and content objectives help keep the lesson and delivery focused. In Science and Social Studies, the content can be adapted to the ENL students through use of graphic organizers, outlines, labeling of pictures and diagrams, and study groups that use technology to show videos of the topics. In mathematics word problems are often difficult because of the math background the students have in their native countries. Using supplementary materials to help them comprehend. Including charts, graphs, pictures, realia, math manipulatives, demonstrations and muitmedia. Lessons that are planned using graphic organizers, outlines, labeling of pictures, study guides,and adapted text will also help the ENL students adapt to the content. The teachers are using the Envisions 2.0 math program workbook and technology component. The math program has an ENL component that gives ideas to differentiate the instruction and support all students. Teachers College is used for reading and writing. Reading materials are selected on an independent reading level, which assessed several times throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 55  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 29 are students are serviced in the least restricted environment, the classroom setting. During the integrated class period the ENL teacher and the Special education teacher work to meet each child’s IEP goals.The teachers plan together during common prep periods and scheduled professional developments. The ENL teachers explain the approaches used to differentiate instruction, consider the individual student and their goals. One professional development focused on the seven learning strategies for Classroom Teachers of ELL students. Debbie Zacarian and Judies Haynes book "Teaching English Learners Across the Content Areas (ASCD, 2010.) These strategies are providing comprehensible input, making lessons visual, connecting to prior knowledge, defining key vocabulary words, modifying vocabulary, cooperative learning strategies, modifying testing and homework for ELL students. This helped connect the gaps that sometimes occur in planning. The teachers are able to focus on specific strategies. This one example is how we are working collaboratively to have our ELL-SWD students achieve and attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P.S. 29 when an ELL student is identified as needing intervention, the classroom teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to help the student achieve and reach success. First, the curriculum and methods of delivery of instruction are evaluated.Next, the team writes a Pupil Intervention Plan(PIP) which focuses on areas of improvement and the strategies and methods that will be initiated to reach the goals. Reading services include Orton Gillingham, Great Leaps, Voyager and Fundations. We offer Reading Rescue, within the classroom setting to target intervention in ELA. Math focuses on Larsen’s Math, Reflex Math, use of manipulatives, CUBES strategy to break apart lengthy word problems, anchor charts, and academic vocabulary in small groups to ensure our ENL students are receiving extra support. Science and Social Studies are addressed through the ELA materials and the SIOP model which builds upon comprehensible input and the building of prior knowledge. These programs are targeted in English and refer to the native language if necessary to support and assess comprehension. We use support staff, that speak the students native language to help assist us in this process. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All programs that are offered at P.S. 29 are available to all students equally. Our ELL students are given equal access. The parents are contacted through notices, that are translated in the students native language if necessary. Based on data trends we will continue with Orton Gillingham to increase the letter and sound recognition, as well as fluency. The results of the NYSESLAT show that we need to improve upon our students writing component of the exam. We are planning in January to have an after school program using the Title III funds that will continue to support the ENL students in listening, speaking, reading and writing. We are looking into purchasing Finish Line New York ELLS by Continental, New York Team, and Orton materials to help improve upon our ENl program as well. Pending funds we would like to incorporate ipads and an ESL brain pop subscription. Also increasing our professional development for our ENL and classroom teachers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 29 has never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All the students of P.S. 29 are offered the after-school center programs, PAWS, and WISE.All after school programs are available to all students .Fliers in the student’s home language are distributed. For our students that are entering 4th grade and 5th grade they have the opportunity to select and area of interest for our Academies.This consists of an Art Academy, Broadcasting Academy, Community Outreach Academy, and Sign Language or Italian Academy.The areas of study can change depending on the expertise of the staff on that grade level that year.The students answer a questionnaire and are then matched to the best academy for their interest. Parent notification through paper notices, home phone calls and teacher-parent meetings are also sources of communication to share all that P.S. 29 has to offer all our students. 2018-19 CEP 56  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used in P.S. 29 are Smartboards, Elmo projectors, and laptops.Our classrooms are equipped with the technology as well as our Media/Library which all students have as a class.The students are able to use Ipads to practice math skills on reflex math, as well as watch interactive videos on Brain Pop. New ELL students enjoy Sight Word Ninja to help them master sight word identification.All classes use visuals to enhance vocabulary, and take virtual tours for social studies. We use Raz kids which reads the book to the students if necessary so that they can connect to the text using their auditory skills. As the students grow as readers, they are able to read independently. This scaffold approach using technology is a favorite of the students. We will continue with the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Program, as well as Envisions 2.0. Our classrooms have manipulatives that are accessible to all students to help with the math achievement. Their is an ENL component of the math program as well. It offers content vocabulary guidance, virtual tours of the unit, which relate real life math examples to the topic that is being covered in the lesson. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed and delivered in our ENL program through use of translators and the language line. We use google translate for email correspondence with parents and families. We do not have any students that are eligible for ELE or Chinese Reading test. If we did, they would be supported throughout the year. Depending on the student and their specific needs we use reading materials in the students home language if its available to help them understand the content. Notices prepared in the home language help ease any stress that can occur to the ENL families. The classroom and ENL teachers work to have translators available for parent meetings. Also teaming students up with student buddies that speak the same native language is a great tool in aiding the ENL students in becoming comfortable academically, socially, and emotionally throughout the school day. Our ENL teachers also work to see the similarities between the home language and English. Working on list of words/objects that sound the same and mean the same in both languages, helps these students as well. Looking for prefixes and suffixes that help break apart the words for better meaning. A deeper look into how words are changed in singular and plural forms, present and past tense of verbs, all help to ease the delivery of the L2 to ENL students. We have also at professional development given out a list of sounds that are present in the English language, that may not be in others such as French, Spanish, and Chinese. This help the teachers especially when working with Orton to focus in on sounds and letters that maybe difficult to students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ELL teachers, classroom teachers, and administration all are involved when programming and planning for the student. Our school focuses on the language development, listening, speaking, reading and writing of all students. All our lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Our materials that coincide with Teacher’s College are grade appropriate, as well as high interest among the grade levels.The NYS standards are implemented which guide instruction and help close the achievement gaps that can occur. Our students are grouped with other ENL students of the same level, using the results from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exams. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 29 does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, and school counselor help the new students and families by informing them of school events, distributing fliers in their home language and reaching out to staff that speak the same language. There is an annual Kindergarten orientation that is held for new students, as well as a Curriculum Conference that is held in September. The parents are welcomed with the students to meet the teachers and staff, share in group activities, walk tour the classrooms, view classroom materials and be part of a Q & A. We are planning family nights for the parents of the ENL students. At these events we would like to have parents participate in some activities the students partake in class. This will give the students a chance to share their strengths with their parents 2018-19 CEP 57  and close and gaps in the at school-home connection. The three ENL teachers Laurie Rinaldo, Christine Gambardella, and Jayme Smith will coordinate and plan the family nights. Students that enter at different times in the school-year will be welcomed and notified through their home language if possible. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered to any student at PS 29. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 29 does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S.29 has three ENL teachers, Mrs. Rinaldo, Mrs. Gambardella, and Mrs. Smith. Our ENL teachers attend district workshops that are conducted by ELL Administrators within our District 31. The teachers have attended the Shelterd Instruction Oberservation Protocol, three day training over the summer as well, to help benefit the students achieving throughout the content areas. The staff has training sessions throughout the year that focus on lesson planning that specifically, the needs of ELL students and developing language acquisition. Cultural awareness, strategies for ELL learners, the components of the NYSESLAT exam, ideas for increasing listening and speaking skills, are some topics that are shared and discussed. Topics that are planned for this school-year are as follows: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the requirements of the mandated professional development minutes required by CR part 154.2 by holding monthly PD meetings. The topics are chosen around the needs of our students, and the improvements that can be made to have them succeed. Agendas and attendance for all professional development meetings are kept in the PD binder housed centrally in the administration office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teachers, Mrs. Rinaldo, Mrs. Gambardella, and Mrs. Smith invite all the ELL parents to annual individual meetings. Appointments are made to accommodate the parents and their schedules.The morning parent involvement time is utilized as well as preparation periods, lunch and learn sessions, and lastly meet and greets. These events are usually planned 2018-19 CEP 58  according to the school calendar as close to the start of the school year as possible. Staff that speak the same languages as our students, as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit are resources used to make the families and students comfortable and the meetings meaningful. We correspond with parents via email using google translate, and our paper notices are translated if the home language if possible. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 29 invites all the parents and families of the student body to attend all events that are offered and part of the school calendar.Our PTA welcomes all the parents to attend and participate in monthly meetings.The PTA meetings are rotated on a morning and afternoon schedule to accommodate the schedules and availability of parents.Our ENL teachers also hold parent workshops, that focus on the needs and wants of the parents described in the parent survey, and through our meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Linda Manfredi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 29 - The Bardwell School School DBN: 31R029 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Linda Manfredi Title Principal Annmarie Vallebuona Assistant Principal Jennifer Pagano Parent Coordinator Laurie Rinaldo ENL/Bilingual Teacher ToniAnn Spinella Parent Joanie LaMonaca Teacher/Subject Area Tara McCarthy Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nicole Gavaris School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Johanna Longardino Other AP Christine Gambardella Other ENL teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/28/17 06/28/17 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R029 School Name: PS 29 - The Bardwell School Superintendent: Anthony LoDico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Laurie Rinaldo ENL Teacher Johanna Longardino Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a child is registered, the family completes a Home Language Identification Survey. After reviewing the HLIS, the parents complete a Preferred Language form so that they may indicate the language in which they prefer notices to go home. The school maintains this preference on emergency contact cards, on the parent coordinator's list, and is also noted in ATS. This is granted for all students where a language other than English is spoken in the home, not just for students who are ELLs. The RCPL and RAPL report is run to see which parents/adults prefer which language for both oral and written language needs. If oral communication is necessary, the emergency contact card is flagged to alert the person using it that the Translation Unit may need to be utilized. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese ANY Estonian Malay English Russian Spanish Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese n/a 1 19 1 1 661 2 23 1 1 1 n/a 0.14 2.67 0.14 0.14 92.97 0.28 3.23 0.14 0.14 0.14 n//a 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 n/a 0 0 0 0 66.67 0 33.33 0 0 0 n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Testing Calendar September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The ENL teacher assists in preparing the Translation Request Form at the beginning of the school year. The form is then sent to the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. The parent coordinator keeps translated versions of yearly documents so they may go home at the appropriate times. 2018-19 CEP 63  Emergency contact cards are flagged to alert the user that the TIU may need to be contacted. Newsletters (The Monthly Bardwell) Parent Teacher conference announcements and report cards November and March Progress Reports October, January and May The PTA member responsible for the Bardwell will send a copy to LAC two weeks before print edition goes out school wide to allow for translation. The translated edition may go home a few days later than the standard version. The parent coordinator keeps translated versions of yearly documents so they may go home at the appropriate times. The parent coordinator keeps translated versions of yearly documents so they may go home at the appropriate times. n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The Welcome Back Night September Parent Engagement Every Wednesday Morning Year Long interpretation service(s)? We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If translation is needed in one of these languages the staff members assist with the interpretation When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If translation is needed in one of these 2018-19 CEP 64  Class Assemblies Throughout the year The first Parent-Teacher Conference November The second Parent Teacher Conference March Final Face to Face meeting May languages the staff members assist with the interpretation. When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If translation is needed in one of these languages the staff members assist with the translation. When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If translation is needed in one of these languages the staff members assist with the interpretation. When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If translation is needed in one of these languages the staff members assist with the interpretation. When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have access to Spanish, Arabic and Russian from school staff members. If 2018-19 CEP 65  translation is needed in one of these languages the staff members assist with the interpretation. When a note or letter from the classroom teacher is in need of translation, the ENL teacher, who is our Language Access Coordinator, will assist in getting the letter translated through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. At P.S. 29 we send a phone blast that includes an interpretation in Spanish and/or Russian. We will use Google Translate to get the major points of the issue across to the parents, and wither send a phone blast or written letter in the language. The other languages will be covered as best as possible, utilizing other parents or students as resources. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We hold Professional Development throughout the year that focus on the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. The ENL teachers explain to the staff that they are available as a resource. A FAQ type sheet is created for teh staff with the information for the Language Line and interpretations services. Also, at the beginning of the school year the Language Access Coordinator receives the language access kit and disseminates the contents to proper staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year, the LAC receives the language access kit and disseminates the contents to the proper staff members. She ensures that the Parents Bill of Rights is sent home to all parents in English and in both English and the preferred language for LEP parents. Parents also receive a copy of the Expect Success guide. Translated versions are also available and sent to the proper homes. The welcome poster is located in a prominent location near the front desk. Signs are posted regarding visitor access in the covered languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the main office due to a language barrier. The safety agent has the TIU over-the-phone card readily available in case an issue arises. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be conducted in the Fall and Spring to assess parent satisfaction on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. The surveys are sent to the translation unit for translation in the languages preferred by the parents as per the RCPL report in ATS. Prior surveys have shown that parents needs have changed over the course of the year. As the parent's acquires more English, they tend to prefer oral communication to be in English. We are working on having translated phone blasts for important messages during the course of the year. 2018-19 CEP 67 
